Money and Banking
Consider the following statements :
Statement-I : Interest income from the deposits in
Infrastructure Investment Trusts (InvITs) distributed
to their investors is exempted from tax, but the
dividend is taxable.
Statement-I1 : InvITs are recognized as borrowers
under the 'Securitization and Reconstruction of
Financial Assets and Enforcement of Security Interest
Act, 2002'.
Which one of the following is correct in respect of the
above statements?
(a) Both Statement-I and Statement-II are correct and
Statement-II is the correct explanation for Statement-I
(b) Both Statement-I and Statement-II are correct and
Statement-II is not the correct explanation for
Statement-I
(c) Statement-I is correct but Statement-II is incorrect
(d) Statement-I is incorrect but Statement-II is correct
ns. (d)
I.A.S. (Pre) 2023
Infrastructure Investment Trusts (InvITs) arere exchange
traded investments that offer investors partial ownership in
infrastructure projects. InvITs are similar to mutual funds.
Like mutual funds, they pool small amounts from various
individuals/institutional investors and invest in infrastructure
projects. These trusts are governed by SEBI regulations. The
dividend and interest income from the deposits in InvITs is
completely taxable as per the slab rate of the investor. Hence,
Statement-I is incorrect.
Statement-II is correct as InvITs (and REITs : Real Estate
Investment Trusts) are now recognized as borrowers under
the 'Securitization and Reconstruction of Financial Assets
and Enforcement of Security Interest (SARFAESI) Act,
2002' and lenders to these trusts, have adequate statutory
enforcement options, absence of which was earlier becoming
a constraint for bankers to lend directly at trust level. This
enables the investors, especially banks, to initiate action
against the trustees of InvITs in case of any default.
2. What is the importance of the term ‘Interest Coverage
Ratio' of a firm in India?
1. It helps in understanding the present risk of a firm
that a bank is going to give loan to.
2. It helps in evaluating the emerging risk of a firm
that a bank is going to give loan to.
3. The higher a borrowing firm's level of Interest
Coverage Ratio, the worse is its ability to service
its debt.
Select the correct answer using the code given below:
(a) 1 and 2 only
(c) 1 and 3 only
Ans. (a)
(b) 2 only
(d) 1, 2 and 3
I.A.S. (Pre) 2020
The 'Interest Coverage Ratio' (ICR) is a debt ratio and
profitability ratio used to measure how easily a firm can pay
interest on its outstanding debt. A higher coverage ratio is
better, although the ideal ratio may vary by industry. Hence,
statement 3 is incorrect. 'ICR' is also sometimes called the
'Times Interest Earned' (TIE) ratio. Lenders, investors and
creditors often use this to determine a company's riskness
relative to its current debt on for future borrowing. Hence.
statement 1 is correct. This ratio is also used by creditors
and prospective lenders to assess the risk of lending capital
to a firm. Hence, statement 2 is also correct.
3. Consider the following statements regarding insolvency
and bankruptcy :
1. Bankruptcy refers to a financial state in which an
individual or entity is unable to pay off their debts
as they become due.
2. Insolvency refers to a legal process, where the assets
of the debtor are liquidated or reorganized for the
benefit of creditors.
3. Bankruptcy is a state whereas insolvency is the
conclusion.
4. The Insolvency and Bankruptcy Board of India
(IBBI) is the regulatory body responsible for
overseeing insolvency and bankruptcy proceedings.
Which of the above statements is/are correct?
(a) 1, 2 and 3
(c) Only 4
Ans. (c)
(b) 2, 3 and 4
(d) Only 1 and 2
69th B.P.S.C. (Pre) 2023
Insolvency refers to aa financial state in which an individual
or entity is unable to pay off their debts as they become due.
While bankruptcy refers to a legal process, where the assets
of the debtor are liquidated or reorganized for the benefit
of creditors.Though both terms deal with excessive debts,
insolvency is a state that can lead to declaring bankruptcy.
Thus, insolvency is a state whereas bankruptcy is the
conclusion. Hence, statements 1, 2 and 3 are incorrect.
Statement 4 is correct as the Insolvency and Bankruptcy
Board of India (IBBI) is the regulatory body responsible for
overseeing insolvency and bankruptcy proceedings. It was
established on 1 October, 2016 and given statutory powers
through the ‘Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code, 2016.'
E-221
Econovelopment General Studies
4. Consider the following statements:
Statement-1: Syndicated lending spreads the risk of
borrower default across multiple lenders.
Statement-11: The syndicated loan can be a fixed
amount/Aump sum of funds, but cannot be a credit line.
Which one of the following is correct in respect of the
above statements?
(a) Both Statement-1 and Statement-ll are correct and
Statement-I1 explains Statement-1
(b) Both Statement-1 and Statement-I1 are correct, but
Statement-II does not explain Statement-1
(c) Statement-l is correct, but Statement-Il is incorrect
(d) Statement-l is incorrect, but Statement-II is correct
Ans. (c)
I.A.S. (Pre) 2024
A syndicated loan is financing offered by a syndicate made
up of a group of lenders that work together to provide
large funds for a single borrower. The borrower can be a
corporation, a large project, or a sovereign government.
The loan can involve a fixed amount of funds, a credit line
or a combination of the two. Each lender in the syndicate
contributes part of the loan amount, and they all share in
the lending risk. The main goal of syndicated lending is to
spread the risk of a borrower defaultacross multiple lenders
or banks, or institutional investors, such as pension funds
and hedge funds. Syndicating allows lenders to spread risk
and take part in financial opportunities that may be too large
for their individual capital base.
5.
Hence, Statement-I is correct while Statement-II is incorrect.
What was the purpose of Inter-Creditor Agreement
signed by Indian banks and financial institutions
recently?
(a) To lessen the Government of India's perennial burden
of fiscal deficit and current account deficit
(b) To support the infrastructure projects of Central and
State Governments
(c) To act as independent regulator in case of applications
for loans of Rs. 50 crore or more
(d) To aim at faster resolution of stressed assets of Rs. 50
crore or more which are-under consortium lending.
Ans. (d)
I.A.S. (Pre) 2019
The Inter-Creditor Agreement (ICA) is part of the project 'Sashakt' approved by the government to address the problem of resolving bad loans. This was suggested by Sunil Mehta Committee. On 23 July, 2018 around 22 public sector banks (including India Post Payments Bank), 19 private sector banks and 32 foreign banks signed ICA to fast track the resolution of
stressed assets. This agreement was also signed by 12 major
financial institutions like I1IC, HUDCO, among others. The
ICA covers cases of stressed assets worth at least Rs. 50crore
under consortium lending. The agreement says if 66 percent
of lenders by value agree to a resolution plan, it would be
binding on all lenders.
Note: As of 2026, the resolution of stressed assets in India
has shifted from the voluntary project ‘Sashakt' model
towards a mandatory, harmonised regulatory framework led
by the RBI and the Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code.
6. Which of the following statements best describes the
term 'Scheme for Sustainable Structuring of Stressed
Assets (S4A)', recently seen in the news?
(a) It is a procedure for considering ecological costs
of developmental schemes formulated by the
Government.
(b) It is a scheme of RBI for reworking the financial
structure of big corporate entities facing genuine
difficulties.
(c) It is a disinvestment plan of the Government regarding
Central Public Sector Undertaking.
(d)It is an important provision in ‘The Insolvency and
Bankruptcy Code' recently implemented by the
Government.
Ans. (b)
I.A.S. (Pre) 2017
The Reserve Bank of India has introduced on 13 June, | 2016 the ‘Scheme for Sustainable Structuring of Stressed
Assets (S4A)' to offer adequate deep financial restructuring opportunities to large borrowers (i.e. big corporate entities) facing genuine difficulties. The S4A scheme aims to strengthen the lenders' ability to deal with large stressed
assets facing genuine hardship and offers a realistic chance for reworking the financial structure of such entities. Under this scheme, a company's debt is bifurcated into two parts- sustainable and unsustainable, based on the cash flows of the |company's project.
7. Consider the following statements:
The Reserve Bank of India's recent directives relating
to ‘Storage of Payment System Data', popularly known
as data diktat, command the payment system providers that
1. they shall ensure that entire data relating to payment
in
systems
 India.
 operated by them are stored in a system only
2. they shall ensure that the systems are owned and
Economic operated by public sector enterprises. & Social Development General Studies
E-222
8.
3. they shall submit the consolidated system audit
report to the Comptroller and Auditor General of
India by the end of the calendar year,
Which of the statements given above is/are correct?
(a) 1 only
(c) 3 only
Ans. (a)
(b) 1 and 2 only
(d) 1, 2 and 3
I.A.S. (Pre) 2019
The Reserve Bank of India issued directives relating to
'Storage of Payment System Data’ on 6th April, 2018. These
directives command the payment system providers that, they
shall ensure that the entire data relating to payment systems
operated by them are stored in a system only in India. This
data should include the full end-to-end transaction details/
information collected/carried/processed as part of the
message/payment instruction. Thus, statement 1 is correct.
According to the directives, system providers shall submit
the System Audit Report (SAR) on completion of the above
requirement and the audit should be conducted by CERTIN empanelled auditors. The SAR should be submitted to
the Reserve Bank not later than December 31, 2018. Thus,
statement 3 is not correct. On the other hand, statement 2 is
also incorrect because it is not necessary that the systems are
owned and operated by public sector enterprises. Therefore,
option (a) is the right answer.
Which committee has been constituted by the
Government of India to boost cashless transaction?
(a) Nachiket More Committee
(b) Shanta Kumar Committee
(c) H.R. Khan Committee
(d) Neeraj Kumar Gupta Committee
(e) None of the above/More than one of the above
Ans. (d)
60th to 62nd B.P.S.C. (Pre) 2016
The Neeraj Kumar Gupta Committee was constituted in
April, 2016 by the Government of India and the RBI to
boost cashless transactions and reduce cash transactions in
the economy. After the demonetization in November, 2016
the Government of India formed a new committee, headed
by NITI Aayog CEO Amitabh Kant, to form a strategy to
expedite the process of transforming India into a cashless
economy.
9. Which one of the following best describes the term
'Merchant Discount Rate' sometimes seen in news?
(a) The incentive given by a bank to a merchant for
accepting payments through debit cards pertaining to
that bank.
Economic & Social Development
(b) The amount paid back by banks to their customers
when they use debit cards for financial transactions
for purchasing goods or services.
(c) The charge to a merchant by a bank for accepting
payments from his customers through the bank's debit
cards.
(d) The incentive given by the Government to merchants
for promoting digital payments by their customers
through Point of Sale (PoS) machines and debit
cards.
Ans. (c)
I.A.S. (Pre) 2018
'Merchant Discount Rate' (MDR) is a fee charged from a
merchant by a bank for accepting payments from customers
through credit and debit cards in their establishments. MDR
compensates the card issuing bank, the lender which puts the
PoS terminal and payment gateways such as MasterCard or
Visa for their services. MDR charges are usually shared in
pre-agreed proportion between the bank and a merchant and
is expressed in percentage of transaction amount.
10. Which one of the following links all the ATMs in India?
(a) Indian Banks Association
(b) National Securities Depository Limited
(c) National Payments Corporation of India
(d) Reserve Bank of India
Ans. (c)
I.A.S. (Pre) 2018
National Financial Switch (NFS) was designed, developed
and deployed by the RBI's Institution for Development and
Research in Banking Technology (IDRBT) in 2004, with the
goal of inter-connecting the ATMs in the country. NFS was
taken over by the National Payments Corporation of India
(NPCI) from IDRBT in December, 2009. NFS provides the
linkages to ATM network in India. Therefore, option (c) is
the correct answer.
11. Consider the following statements :
1. National Payments Corporation of India (NPСІ)
helps in promoting the financial inclusion in the
country.
2. NPCI has launched RuPay, a card payment scheme.
Which of the statements given above is/are correct?
(a) 1 only
(b) 2 only
(c) Both 1 and 2
(d) Neither 1 nor 2
Ans. (c)
General Studies
I.A.S. (Pre) 2017
E-223
The National Payments Corporation of India (NPCI)
has been set up with the help of the RBI to foster better
financial inclusion by creating high-impact infrastructure
and business processes for better, cheaper, consolidated
and more efficient banking and retail payment systems in
India and facilitating outreach of these banking services to
those who normally do not use banks or do not have access to
them. Thus, statement 1 is correct. Statement 2 is also correct
as NPCI has launched 'RuPay', a domestic card payment
system in 2012. The RuPay card payment system is a step
towards greater and deeper financial inclusion, as it brings in
more banks and a wider spectrum of users into the system.
12. Which of the following is a most likely consequence of
implementing the ‘Unified Payments Interface (UPI)'?
(a) Mobile wallets will not be necessary for online
payments.
(b) Digital currency will totally replace the physical
currency in about two decades.
(c) FDI inflows will drastically increase.
(d) Direct transfer of subsidies to poor people will become
very effective.
Ans. (a)
I.A.S. (Pre) 2017
Unified Payments Interface (UPI) is an instant real-time
payment system developed by National Payment Corporation
of India (NPCI) for facilitating inter-bank transactions
through mobile phone. UPI allows sending or requesting
money between any two bank accounts through inter-
|bank payment system. The most likely consequence of
implementing the UPI is that mobile wallets will not be
necessary for online payments, because customer's mobile
number is directly linked with the bank account using bank's
‘customized app' which is built on the UPI platform.
13. Consider the following countries :
I. United Arab Emirates
III. Germany
V. Bangladesh
II. France
IV. Singapore
How many countries amongst the above are there other
than India where international merchant payments are
accepted under UPI?
(a) Only two
(c) Only four
Ans. (b)
(b) Only three
(d) All the five
I.A.S. (Pre) 2025
NPCI International Payments Ltd. (NIPL) has launched
UPI's 'Global Acceptance/International Merchant Payments'
facility, under which Indian users can scan a QR code at select
shops and merchant outlets abroad and make payments
directly from their Indian bank accounts. Currently, UPI is
operational in eight countries- the United Arab Emirates,
Nepal, Bhutan, Singapore, Mauritius, France, Sri Lanka and
Qatar-and is accepted at select merchant outlets there. This
list does not include Germany and Bangladesh. Therefore.
among the five given countries, only three-the United
Arab Emirates, France and Singapore- accept international
merchant payments through UPI outside India. Hence, the
correct answer is option (b).
14. Consider the following statements in respect of RTGS
and NEFT:
I. In RTGS, the settlement time is instantaneous
while in case of NEFT, it takes some time to settle
payments.
II. In RTGS, the customer is charged for inward
transactions while that is not the case for NEFT.
III. Operating hours for RTGS are restricted on certain
days while this is not true for NEFT.
Which of the statements given above is/are correct?
(a) I only
(c) I and IШ
Ans. (a)
(b) I and II
(d) III only
I.A.S. (Pre) 2025
Practically, settlement in RTGS is considered almost realtime, whereas in NEFT, due to batch-based settlement, it may
take some time (around two hours). Therefore, Statement I
is correct.
No charges can be levied on the beneficiary for an inward
(incoming) RTGS credit. No charges are levied on the
beneficiary for inward (incoming) NEFT transactions either.
Hence, Statement II is incorrect.
Even under the earlier system, both RTGS and NEFT had
restrictions on operating hours, and under the new 24×7
system, there is no separate restriction applicable to one and
not the other. Therefore, Statement III-stating that RTGS
hours are restricted on certain days but NEFT hours are notis incorrect as per the current rules.
15. Consider the following statements in respect of the
digital rupeе:
1. It is a sovereign currency issued by the Reserve
Bank of India (RBI) in alignment with its monetary
policy.
2. It appears as a liability on the RBI's balance sheet.
3. It is insured against inflation by its very design.
4. It is freely convertible against commercial bank
money and cash.
Economic & Social Development General Studies E-224
Which of the statements given above are correct?
(a) 1 and 2 only
(c) 2 and 4 only
Ans. (d)
(d) 1, 2 and 4
(b) 1 and 3 only
I.A.S. (Pre) 2024
Issued by The Reserve Bank of India (RBI), the Central
Bank Digital Currency (CBDC) or Digital Rupee (or e) is
a digital variant of physical currency. Reserve Bank broadly
defines CBDC as the legal tender issued by a central bank
in a digital form. It is akin to sovereign paper currency
but takes a different form, exchangeable at par with the
existing currency and shall be accepted as a medium of
payment, legal tender and a safe store of value. As per the
RBI's concept Note on Central Bank Digital Currency, the
features of CBDC include:
CBDC is sovereign currency issued by central banks in
alignment with their monetary policy.
It appears as a liability on the central bank's balance
sheet.
Must be accepted as a medium of payment, legal tender,
and a safe store of value by all citizens, enterprises, and
government agencies.
Freely convertible against commercial bank money and
cash.
Fungible legal tender for which holders need not have a
bank account.
Expected to lower the cost of issuance of money and
transactions.
Hence, statements 1, 2 and 4 are correct, while statement 3
is incorrect because digital rupee is same as physical rupee
and exchangeable at a 1:1 ratio. Thus, like physical rupee it
is also not inherently insured against inflation and its value
can be decreased by the inflation.
16. With reference to Central Bank digital currencies,
consider the following statements :
1. It is possible to make payments in a digital currency
without using US dollar or SWIFT system.
2. A digital currency can be distributed with a
condition programmed into it such as a time-frame
for spending it.
Which of the statements given above is/are correct?
(a) 1 only
(c) Both 1 and 2
Ans. (c)
(b) 2 only
(d) Neither 1 nor 2
Economic & Social Development
I.A.S. (Pre) 2023
A Central Bank digital currency (CBDC) is a form of digital
currency issued by a country's Central Bank. It is similar
to cryptocurrencies, except that its value is fixed by the
Central Bank and is equivalent to the country's fiat currency.
Governments and Central Banks worldwide are exploring the
possibility of using government-backed digital currencies.
Alternatives to SWIFT (Society for Worldwide Interbank
Financial Telecommunication) system and the U.S. dollar are
coming from two directions: cryptocurrencies and Central
Bank digital currencies. It is possible to make payments in a
digital currency without using US dollar or SWIFT system.
Countries will be able to directly exchange digital currencies
in a bilateral way and without going through SWIFT or
similar settlement systems.
A digital currency can be distributed with a condition
programmed into it such as a time-frame for spending it.
China's digital currency is programmable to have an expiry
date, which gives its Central Bank power to effectively
control and boost consumption demand or impose negative
rate. China is exploring expiration dates with its upcoming
digital yuan, or DCEP, which means the currency will expire
if not used in a certain time-frame.
Hence, both given statements are correct.
17. With reference to 'Bitcoins', sometimes seen in the
news, which ofthe following statements is / are correct?
1. Bitcoins are tracked by the central banks of the
countries.
2. Anyone with a Bitcoin address can send and receive
Bitcoins from anyone else with a Bitcoin address.
3. Online payments can be sent without either side
knowing the identity of the other.
Select the correct answer using the code given below:
(a) 1 and 2 only
(c) 3 only
Ans. (b)
(b) 2 and 3 only
(d) 1, 2 and 3
I.A.S. (Pre) 2016
Bitcoin is a digital currency, that was created in January, 2009
by the mysterious and pseudonymous Satoshi Nakamoto.
Bitcoin is a type of cryptocurrency. Bitcoins are not issued
or booked by any banks or governments. Bitcoin is one of
the first digital currencies to use peer to peer technology to
facilitate instant payments, in which anyone with a Bitcoin
address can send and receive Bitcoins from anyone else with
a Bitcoin address. Under this system, online payments can
be sent without either side knowing the identity of the other.
Hence, option (b) is the correct answer.
General Studies E-225
18. With reference to Non-Fungible Tokens (NFTs), consider the following statements
1. They enable the digital representation of physical
assets.
2. They are unique cryptographic tokens that exist on
a blockchain.
3. They can be traded or exchanged at equivalency and
therefore can be used as a medium of commercial
transactions.
Which of the statements given above are correct?
(a) 1and 2 only
(c) 1 and 3 only
Ans. (a)
(b) 2 and 3 only
(d) 1, 2 and 3
20. The sum of which of the following constitutes Broad
Money in India?
1. Currency with the public
2. Demand deposits with banks
3. Time deposits with banks
4. Other deposits with RBI
Choose the correct answer using the codes given below
(a) 1 and 2
(c) 1, 2, 3 and 4
Ans. (c)
(b) 1, 2 and 3
(d) 1, 2, and 4
See the explanation of above question.
I.A.S. (Pre) 2022 21.
Non-Fungible Tokens (NFTs) are assets that have been tokenized via a blockchain. They are unique cryptographic tokens
that exist on a blockchain and cannot be replicated. NFTs
represent an ownership interest in any tangible or intangible
asset. NFTs can represent digital or real-world items like
artwork and real estate. They enable the digital representation
of physical assets. Hence, statements 1 and 2 are correct.
NFTs and cryptocurrencies are very different from each
other. Cryptocurrencies are usually fungible from a financial
perspective, meaning that they can be traded or exchanged,
one for another. NFTs shift the crypto paradigm by making
each token unique and irreplaceable, making it impossible
for one non-fungible token to be 'equal' to another. Thus,
unlike cryptocurrencies, they cannot be traded or exchanged
at equivalency and therefore cannot be used as a medium of
commercial transactions. Hence, statement 3 is incorrect.
19. Consider the following:
1. Currency with the public
2. Demand deposits with banks
3. Time deposits with banks
Which of these are included in Broad Money (M,) in
India?
(a) 1 and 2
(c) 2 and 3
Ans. (d)
(b) 1 and 3
(d) 1, 2 and 3
I.A.S. (Pre) 2002
U.P.P.C.S. (Mains) 2008
RBI publishes figures for four alternative measures of money supply, viz. M, M,, M., and M,. M, is known as Broad Money. M. includes
M= Currency with the public + Demand deposits with banks
+ Other deposits with RBI + Time deposits with banks
or M, =M,+ Time deposits with banks
Economic & Social Development
I.A.S. (Pre) 1997
If you withdraw Rs. 1,00,000 in cash from your
Demand Deposit Account at your bank, the immediate
effect on aggregate money supply in the economy wiln
be:
(a) to reduce it by Rs. 1,00,000
(b) to increase it by Rs. 1,00,000
(c) to increase it by more than Rs. 1,00,000
(d) to leave it unchanged
Ans. (d)
I.A.S. (Pre) 2020
M, = M, (Currency with the public + Demand deposits with
banks + Other deposits with RBI) + Time deposits with banks
M is the most commonly used measure of money supply. It is
also known as aggregate money supply (Broad money). Now,
if we withdraw Rs.1,00,000, Demand deposits component
will fall by Rs. 1,00,000 and CU (Currency held by public)
will increase by Rs.1,00,000. It means, it leaves the money
supply unchanged. Hence, option (d) is the correct answer.
22. Consider the following liquid assets :
1. Demand deposits with the banks
2. Time deposits with the banks
3. Savings deposits with the banks
4. Currency
The correct sequence of these assets in the decreasingorder of liquidity is-
(a) 1-4-3-2
(c) 2-3-1-4
Ans. (d)
(b) 4-3-2-1
(d) 4-1-3-2
I.A.S. (Pre) 2013
Currency is the most liquid asset becaus it ieasiesfor tnsactions. Time deposit is least liquid because it is fixed for a
definite period of time and it cannot be used before its maturity. Demand deposits are more liquid than saving deposits
because they can be demanded by the holder from the bank
at any time. Hence, option (d) is the correct answer.
General Studies
23. The money multiplier in an economy increases with
which one of the following?
(a) Increase in the Cash Reserve Ratio in the banks
(b) Increase in the Statutory Liquidity Ratio in the banks
(c) Increase in the banking habit of the people
(d) Increase in the population of the country
economy The government had taken many step to bring
out illegal money from time to time, such as Voluntary
Disclosure of Income Scheme
26. Which one of the following effects of creation of black
money in India has been the main cause of worry to
the Government of India?
Ans. (c)
I.A.S. (Pre) 2021
I.A.S. (Pre) 2019 (a) Diversion of resources to the purchase of real estate
and investment in luxury housing
(b) Investment in unproductive activities and purchase of
precious stones, jewellery, gold, ete.
(c) Large donations to political parties and growth of
regionalism
The money multiplier describes how an initial deposit leads to
a greater final increase in the total money supply. It identifies
the ratio of decrease and/or increase in the money supply in
relation to the commensurate decrease and/or increase in
deposits. Increase in banking habit of the population will
lead to more deposits in the banking system and hence, banks
have more money to lend out, which leads to the increase in
money multiplier. On the other hand, increase in reserve ratios
like Cash Reserve Ratio (CRR) and Statutory Liquidity Ratio
(SLR) decreases the money multiplier, while the increase in
the population does not necessarily leads to the increase in
banking deposits/money multiplier.
24. Money multiplier in India is defined as:
Broad Money
(a) Base Money
Broad Money (b) Reserve Money
(c) Reserve Money
Base Money
Base Money (d) Reserve Money
U.P.P.C.S. (Mains) 2009
U.P.P.C.S. (Spl.) (Mains) 2008
Ans. (b)
In India, we define money multiplier as the ratio of the stock
of money or Broad Money (M,) to the stock of high powered
money or Reserve Money (M, or R). So, if money multiplier
is K, then K = M₂/M, or M/R
25. What is black money?
(a) It is an illegal currency
(b) It is a Fake currency
(c) It is dirty/bad money
(d) It is an illegal income upon which income tax is not
paid
Ans. (d)
(d) Loss of revenue to the State Exchequer due to tax
evasio
Ans. (d)
I.A.S. (Pre) 2021
There is no uniform definition of black money in the literature or economic theory. In fact, several terms with similar
connotations have been in vogue, including 'unaccounted
income', 'black income', ‘dirty money', 'black wealth.
‘underground wealth', ‘black economy', 'parallel economy',
'shadow economy', and 'irregular' or 'unofficial' economy.
All these terms usually refer to any income on which the
taxes imposed by the government or public authorities have
not been paid. According to the 2019 and recent report of Standing Committee on Finance, the sectors that see the
highest incidence of black money include real estate, mining,
pharmaceuticals, pan masala, gutkha and tobacco industry, bullion and commodity & financial markets, the film industry,
educational institutions and professionals. Loss of revenue
to the State Exchequer due to tax evasion is a big problem
for the Indian economy which has been highlighted multiple
times by the Economic Surveys. Black money (tax evasion)
reduces the fiscal resources of the government for running
the welfare schemes. Hence, the most appropriate answer
is option (d).
27. With reference to the Government of India, consider
the following information
Organization
U.P. Lower Sub. (Spl.) (Pre) 2002, 2003
Some of its
functions
It works
under
1. Directorate of
Enforcement
Enforcement Internal
of the Fugitive Security
Economic Division-1,
Offenders Act,
2018
Black money includes all funds earned through illegal activities and otherwise legal income that is not recorded for
tax purposes. Black money proceeds are usually received in
cash from underground economic activity and, as such, are
not taxed. It is a big threat for the development of a country's
Economic & Social Development General Studies
Ministry
of Home
Affairs
E-227
Directorate
of Revenue
Intelligence
Enforces the
Provisions of the
Customs Act,
1962
Department
of Revenuе,
Ministry of
Finance
ΠΙ. Directorate
General of
Systems
and Data
Management
Carrying out big
data analytics to
assist tax officers
for better policy
and nabbing tax
Department
of Revenue,
Ministry of
Financе
evaders
In how many of the above rows is the information
correctly matched?
(a) Only one
(c) All the three (d) None
which included income which had not been reported and
thus was untaxed; money gained through corruption, illegal
goods sales and illegal activities such as human trafficking
and counterfeit currency. Other stated objectives included
expanding the tax base and increasing the number of
taxpayers;
reducing the number of transactions carried out by cash
increasing the use of digital modes of transaction;
reducing the finances available to terrorists and radical
groups; and
integrating the formal and informal economy.
29. Paper currency was first started in India in:
(a) 1862 (b) Only two (c) 1601
I.A.S. (Pre) 2025 Ans. (a)
(b) 1542
(d) 1880
U.P.P.C.S. (Mains) 2011
Ans. (a)
The Enforcement Directorate (ED) has been entrusted with the
responsibility of enforcing the Fugitive Economic Offenders
Act, 2018. The ED functions under the administrative control
of the Department of Revenue, Ministry of Finance, and not
under the Internal Security Division-I of the Ministry of
Home Affairs. Therefore, Row I is not correctly matched.
The Directorate of Revenue Intelligence (DRI) is primarily
responsible for enforcing the provisions of the Customs Act,
1962. DRI is a directorate under the Central Board of Indirect
Taxes and Customs (CBIC), and CBIC itself functions under
the Department of Revenue, Ministry of Finance. Therefore,
Row II is correctly matched.
In the question, the work mentioned in Row III actually relates
to the Directorate General of Analytics & Risk Management
(DGARM), not to the Directorate General of Systems & Data
Management (DG Systems & Data Management).
Thus, out of the three rows, only Row II is correctly matched.
Therefore, the correct answer is option (a).
28. Which of the following was not the stated objective of
demonetization in India?
(a) Reduction in the use of cash in the economy.
(b) Increasing the use of digital modes of transaction.
(c) Expanding the tax base.
(d) Increasing the growth rate of G.D.P.
Ans. (d)
U.P.P.C.S. (Mains) 2017
On 8 November 2016, the Government of India announced
the demonetization of all Rs. 500 and Rs. 1000 banknotes
of the Mahatma Gandhi Series. The government said that
the main objective of the exercise was curbing black money,
Paper currency, in the modern sense, traces its origins to the
late 18th century with the issues of private banks as well as
semi-government banks (the Bank of Bengal, the Bank of
Bombay and the Bank of Madras alluded to as the Presidencу
Banks). Among the earliest issues were those by the Bank
of Hindustan (1770-1832), the General Bank of Bengal and
Bihar (1773-75), the Bengal Bank (1784-91), amongst others.
The Paper Currency Act of 1861 conferred upon Government
of India the monopoly of Note Issue bringing to an end note
issues of private and presidency banks. After that, the first paper currency was issued in 1862 by the Government. Hence.
as per the given options, 1862 is the most appropriate answer.
30. Who headed the Royal Commission on Indian currency
appointed in 1913?
(a) James Wilson
(b) J.M. Keynes
(c) Sir Austin Chamberlain
(d) Sir W.R. Mansfield
Ans. (c)
70th B.P.S.C. (Pre) 2024
The Royal Commission on Indian Finance and Currency.
also known as the Chamberlain Commission, was a 1913
British commission appointed to examine India's currency
and finance system, with Austin Chamberlain as its chairman
The Chamberlain Commission abandoned the ideal of a
gold standard based on a gold currency, and accepted in its
place an exchange standard with an excrescent currency of
sovereigns not essential to the working of the system. Owing
to the outbreak of the World War I, no action was taken on
these recommendations.
Economic & Social Development General Studies E-228
/. When did the 'Naya paisa'introduced with the decimal system ofcoinage become, paisa?
(a) April 1, 1957
(c) June 1, 1964
(b) April 1, 1965
(d) October 2, 1961
Uttarakhand P.C.S, (Pre) 2005
Ans. (c)
The decimal system of coinage i.e. 'paisa' was first introduced
inIndia on 1s April, 1957 after decimalization of the Indian
nupee. From 1957 to 1964, the 'paisa' was called 'Naya paisa
and from 1 June 1964, the term 'Naya' was dropped and denomination was named 'paisa'.
.In India, the decimal coinage system was introduced in the year :
(a) 1951
(c) 1957
Ans. (c)
(b) 1955
(d) 1960
U.P.P.C.S. (Mains) 2010
U.P.P.C.S. (Mains) 2005
U.P.P.C.S. (Pre) 1995
See the explanation of above question.
Which one of the following statements correctly
describes the meaning of legal tender money?
(a) The money which is tendered in courts of law to defray
the fee of legal cases
(b) The money which a creditor is under compulsion to
accept in settlement of his claims
(c) The bank money in the form of cheques, drafts, bills
of exchange, etc.
(d) The metallic money in circulation in a country
Ans. (b)
I.A.S. (Pre) 2018
Legal tender is a coin or a banknote that is legally tenderable
for discharge of debt or obligation. In other words, legal
lender money is a form of money recognized by law as a
means to settle a public or private debt or to meet a financial
obligation, including tax payments, contracts, and legal
fines or damages. Hence, it is the money which a creditor is
ander compulsion to accept in settlements ofhis claims. The
etallic money (coins) in circulation in a country is part of
egal tender which includes banknotes also. But, there may
e some limitations (as in India) for coins to be legal tender
mpayment.
The coins issued by Government of India under Section 6
of The Coinage Act, 2011, shall be legal tender in payment
or on account provided that a coin has not been defaced and
has not lost weight so as to be less than such weight as may
Economic & Social Development
be prescribed in its case. Coin of any denomination not lower
than one rupee shall be legal tender for any sum not exceeding
one thousand rupees. Fifty paise (half rupee) coin shall be
legal tender for any sum not exceeding ten rupees. While
anyone cannot be forced to accept coins beyond the limits
mentioned above, voluntarily acccepting coins for amounts
exceeding the limits mentioned above is not prohibited.
Every banknote issued by Rescrve Bank of India (Rs. 2,
Rs. 5, Rs. 10, Rs. 20, Rs. 50, Rs. 100, Rs. 200, Rs. 500 and
Rs. 2000), unless withdrawn from circulation, shall be legal
tender at any place in India in payment or on account for the
amount expressed therein, and shall be guaranteed by the
Central Government, subject to provisions of sub-section
(2) Section 26 of RBI Act, 1934. Rs. 1 notes issued by
Government of India from time to time are also legal tender.
Rs. 500 and Rs. 1000 banknotes of Mahatma Gandhi series
(old) issued up to November 08, 2016 have ceased to be legal
tender with effect from the midnight of November 8, 2016.
34. The Reserve Bank of India has the power to print
currency notes of Rupees upto :
(a) Rs. 10,000
(c) Rs. 15,000
Ans. (a)
(b) Rs. 5,000
(d) Rs. 1,000
U.P.P.S.C. (R.I.) 2014
The Reserve Bank of India (RBI) has the power to print
currency notes in the denomination of upto Rs. 10,000. The
highest denomination note ever printed by the RBI was the
Rs. 10,000 note in 1938 which was demonetized in 1946.
The Rs. 10,000 note was again introduced in 1954 which
was demonetized in 1978. As per Section 24 (1) of the RBI
Act, 1934, bank notes issued by the RBI shall be of the
denominational values of Rs. 2, Rs. 5, Rs. 10, Rs. 20, Rs. 50,
Rs. 100, Rs. 500, Rs. 1,000, Rs. 5,000 and Rs. 10,000 or of
such other denominational values, not exceeding Rs. 10,000,
as per the Central Government may, on the recommendation
of the Central Board, specify in this behalf. As per the RBI's
Annual Report 2022, presently, the Reserve Bank issues
banknotes in denominations of Rs. 2, Rs. 5, Rs. 10, Rs. 20,
Rs. 50, Rs. 100, Rs. 200 and Rs. 500. However, printing
of notes in the denominations of Rs. 2 and Rs. 5 has been
discontinued (and they are not currently being issued) but
such notes issued earlier by the RBI continue to be legal
tender. Rs. 1 note issued by the Government of India from
time to time also continue to be legal tender.
Note: The Rs. 2000 denomination banknote was introduced
in November, 2016 under Section 24 (1) of RBI Act primarily
with the objective of meeting the currency requirements of
General Studies E-229
the economy in an expeditious manner after withdrawl of
the legal tender status of all Rs. 500 and Rs. 1000 banknotes
in circulation at that time. Printing of Rs. 2000 banknotes
was stopped in 2018-19 and RBI decided to withdraw Rs.
2000 banknote from circulation in 2023. However, the Rs.
2000 banknote will continue to maintain its legal tender
status. Public and entities holding such notes were initially
asked to either exchange or deposit them in bank branches
by 30 September, 2023. The deadline was later extended
to 7 October, 2023. Deposit and exchange services at bank
branches were discontinued after that. Starting 8 October.
2023, individuals have been provided with the choice of either
exchanging the Rs. 2000 banknotes or having the equivalent
sum credited to their bank accounts at the 19 Issue Offices
of the RBІ.
35. Note issuing department of RBI should always possess
the minimum gold stock of worth:
(a) Rs 85 crore
(c) Rs 200 crore
Ans. (b)
(b) Rs 115 crore
(d) None of the above
U.P. Lower Sub. (Pre) 2008
The system of note issue by the Reserve Bank of India
was founded on the proportional reserve system which
was replaced by a system of minimum holding of foreign
securities (Minimum Reserve System) of Rs. 400 crore and
gold coin and bullion of Rs. 115 crore or a total of Rs. 515
crore in 1956. Under the Reserve Bank (Second Amendment)
Act, 1957, the aggregate value of gold coin, gold bullion and
foreign securities in the Issue Department was stipulated at
not less than Rs. 200 crore at any time, of which the value of
gold coin and bullion should at no time be less than Rs. 115
crore. These stipulations have not been revised since then.
36. In India ‘Currency Notes issue system' is based on :
(a) Proportional reserve system
(b) Minimum reserve system
(c) Fixed exchange rate system
(d) Full convertibility system
Ans. (b)
U.P.P.S.C. (GIC) 2010
U.P.P.C.S. (Mains) 2004, 2007
See the explanation of above question.
37. Reserve Bank of India issues currency notes against
which of the following?
(a) Gold (b) Foreign security
(c) Govt. of India security (d) All of the above
M.P.P.C.S. (Pre) 2012
All banknotes issued by the RBI are backed by assets such
as gold coin, gold bullion, rupee coin,Govt. of India rupee
securities and foreign securities, as defined in Section 33 of
RBI Act, 1934.
38. Who is authorized to issue coins in India ?
(a) Reserve Bank of India
(b) Ministry of Finance
(c) State Bank of India
(d) National Stock Market
Ans. (b)
U.P. U.D.A./L.D.A. (Spl.) (Pre) 2010
The Government of India (Ministry of Finance) is the issuing
authority of coins and supplies coins to the Reserve Bank on
demand. The Reserve Bank puts the coins into circulation on
behalf of the Central Government.
Coins are minted by the Government of India. The Reserve
Bank is the agent of the Government for distribution, issue
and handling of coins. Four mints are in operation : Mumbai
in Maharashtra, Noida in Uttar Pradesh, Kolkata (W. Bengal).
and Hyderabad (Telangana).
39. Coins are minted in India at :
(a) Delhi, Mumbai and Kolkata
(b) Delhi, Kolkata and Hyderabad
(c) Mumbai, Delhi and Bangalore
(d) Mumbai, Kolkata and Hyderabad
Ans. (d)
U.P. P.C.S. (Mains) 2008
See the explanation of above question.
40. Currency expansion can be best described
(a) Higher prices
(b) Increase in price coordinates
(c) Increase in purchasing power of currency
(d) Increase in prices of specific commodities
Ans. (a)
R.A.S./R.T.S. (Pre) 1996Currency expansion means supply of money has increased
Due to increase in money supply, the value of money
decreases. As a result, prices of goods and services will rise
41. With reference to Indian economy, demand-pull infiationcan be caused/increased by which of the following?
1. Expansionary policies
2. Fiscal stimulus
3. Inflation-indexing wages
4. Higher purchasing power
5. Rising interest rates Ans. (d)
Economic & Social Development General Studies E-23
Select the correct answer using the code given below.
(a) 1, 2 and 4 only
(c) 1,2,3 and 5 only
Ans, (a)
(b) 3,4 and 5 only
(d) 1, 2, 3, 4, and 5
I.A.S. (Pre) 2021
Demand-pull inflation emerges when the aggregate demands
exceed the level of aggregate supply or full employment
output. Consumers and investors seek to buy more than
the total amount of output that can be produced. The demand-pull inflation may be caused by an increase in money
supply. This would also occur when aggregate demand
increases either because of rise in the marginal efficiency of
capital or a rise in the propensity to consume. Expansionary
fiscal policy is intended to increase the money supply in the
economy using budgetary instruments to either raise spending or cut taxes. So, expansionary fiscal policy can cause
demand-pull inflation. Hence, statement 1 is correct.
A fiscal stimulus is a package comprising tax rebates and
incentives. It is used by the government to stimulate the
economy and prevent the country from a financial crisis.
It increases money supply in the economy and is intended to
increase the demand,job creation, etc. So, it can also lead to
the demand-pull inflation. Hence, statement 2 is also correct.
Inflation-indexing wages do not lead to demand-pull
inflation because they are adjusted with inflation. They are
provided to reduce the effect of inflation. Hence, statement
3 is incorrect.
Higher purchasing power can lead to demand-pull inflation, because consumers have a lot to spend and they can
demand more goods/services. Hence, statement 4 is correct.
Rising of interest rates reduces money supply in the economy,
so, it cannot lead to demand-pull inflation. Hence, statement
5 is incorrect.
42. Due to inflation :
(a) Prices of goods increase
(b) The value of money falls
(c) The exchange rate improves
(d) Above (a) and (b)
(e) Above (a), (b) and (с)
Ans. (d)
Chhattisgarh P.C.S. (Pre) 2013
Inflation refers to the rise in the prices of goods and services
and decline of purchasing power of a given currency over time. In comparison to foreign currencies, the value of Indian rupee also declines due to inflation. Hence, it does
not improve the exchange rate.
Economic & Social Development
43. Which of the following is/are definite implication(s) of
a fall in inflation rate:
1. Prices have fallen.
II. Prices are increasing more slowly than before.
III. Food supply has increased.
IV. There is industrial stagnation.
Select the correct answer from the codes given below
Codes:
(a) I and III
(c) II only
Ans. (c)
(b) Ionly
(d) I, III and IV
U.P.P.C.S. (Mains) 2017
A falling rate of inflation means that prices are increasing
more slowly than before. The common measure of inflation
is the inflation rate, the annualized percentage change in a
general price index (e.g. consumer price index). If inflation
rate is 5% in any month of the last year and it is 4% in same
month this year, that means prices are increasing in both
years in comparison to their previous years, but prices are
increasing more slowly this year than the last year.
Deflation, or negative inflation on the otherhand, happens
when prices generally fall in a economy in comparison to the
prices of same period of the previous year. Increased food
supply affects prices, but it is not a definite implication of a
fall in inflation rate.
44. Who amongst the following benefits most from inflation :
(a) Creditors
(b) Debtors
(c) Savings Account holders
(d) Government pensioners
Ans. (b)
U.P.P.C.S. (Pre) 1995
Due to inflation, the prices of goods and services increase
and the purchasing power of currency decline over time.
In this situation, debitors get advantage and creditors get
disadvantage.
Affected Groups
Debtors, Producer, Traders, Farmers,
Changeable Income groups etc.
|Consumers, Creditors, Moneylenders,
| Pensioners, Fixed Income groups,
|Savings Account holders etc.
Public expenditure, Import, Employment,
Taxes
Impact of Inflation
Benefit
Loss
Increase
Public savings, Export Decrease
General Studies E-231
45. Inflation is beneficial to which of the following section
of economy?
(a) Creditors
(b) Investors in bonds and securities
(c) Debtors
(d) Consumers
Ans. (c)
U.P. R.O./A.R.O. (Mains) 2016
Inflation occurs when there is a general increase in the
price of goods and services and a fall in purchasing value
of money. Inflation allows debtors (borrowers) to pay
credtitors (lenders) back with money worth less than when
it was originally borrowed, which benefits debtors. Thus,
inflation brings about a redistribution of real wealth in favour
of debtors at the cost of creditors. Investors in bonds and
securities with fixed interest rates, consumers, fixed income
groups pensioners etc. also lose in real terms during inflation.
46. Consider the following statements :
1. Inflation benefits the debtors.
2. Inflation benefits the bond-holders.
Which of the statements given above is/are correct?
(a) Only 1
(c) Both 1 and 2
Ans. (a)
(b) Only 2
(d) Neither 1 nor 2
See the explanation of above question.
I.A.S. (Pre) 2013
47. Which of the following statement is correct?
by 5 percent. It means inflation is measured on the basis ofweek by week. Hence, it is clear that to get a zero rate ofinflation, the annual rate of inflation in every week of theyear should be zero.
49. Assertion (A) : The rate of inflation in India has come
down in the last three years.
Reason (R): Foreign investment in the country is increasing rapidly during these years.
Select the correct answer from the codes given below:Codes:
(a) Both A and R are true and R is the correct explanation
of A
(b) Both A and R are true but R is not the correct expla
nation of A
(c) A is true, but R is false
(d) A is false, but R is true
Ans. (c)
U.P.P.C.S. (Pre) 1998Based on the average of 52 weeks, the inflation was 10.9%
in 1994-95 which came down to 4.8% in 1997-98. Hence.
Assertion (A) is correct. In 1994-95 India received 4807
million US $ as foreign investment while it received 5353
million US $ in 1997-98. Thus, it is clear that there was
minimal increase in foreign investment during that period.
Hence, Reason (R) is incorrect.
50. Which one of the following statements is an appropriatedescription of deflation?
(a) It is a sudden fall in the value of a currency againstother currencies.
(a) Inflation benefits the bond holders.
(b) Inflation benefits the debtors.
(c) Inflation benefits the fixed income groups.
(d) None of these
(b) It is persistent recession in both the financial and realsectors of economy.
Uttarakhand P.C.S. (Pre) 2021
Ans. (b)
See the explanation of above question.
(c) It is a persistent fall in the general price level of goodsand services.
(d) It is a fall in the rate of inflation over a period of time
I.A.S. (Pre) 201048. A zero rate of inflation obtains necessarily in a year
where the annual rate of inflation: Ans. (c)
(a) in every week of the year is zero
(b) is falling in every week of the year
(c) is both falling and rising in a year
(d) is constant in every week of the year
Ans. (a)
I.A.S. (Pre) 1993
If there is a 5 percent inflation in a particular week of a month
in a year, it means that in comparison to same week of the
| same month in previous year, the prices of goods have increased
Inflation denotes rise in general price level in an economy.
Deflation is just opposite of inflation which denotes fall in
general price level of goods and services in an economy.
51. A rapid increase in the rate of inflation is sometimesattributed to the 'base effect'. What is ‘base effect"?
(a) It is the impact of drastic deficiency in supply due to
failure of crops
(b) It is the impact of the surge in demand due to rapideconomic growth
Economic& Social Development General Studies E-232
(c) It is the impact of the price levels of previous year on
the calculation of inflation rate
(d) None of the statements (a), (b), (c) given above is
correct in this context.
Ans. (c)
I.A.S. (Pre) 2011
Base effect' refers to a kind of statistical anomaly that causes
steep hike or decline in the rate of price rise or fall because the
current prices are compared relative to the previous period. If
last year's price of certain articles is low and this year it has
returned to its normal price, yet the rate of increase, which
is relative to the last year's price, is shown high.
52. Which one of the following governmental steps has
proved relatively effective in controlling the double
digit rate of inflation in the Indian economy in the
recent years?
(a) Enhanced rate of production of all consumer goods
(b) Streamlining public distribution system
(c) Pursuing an export-oriented strategy
(d) Containing budgetary deficit and unproductive
expenditure
Ans. (d)
I.A.S. (Pre) 1994
Revenue deficit is considered as an unproductive expenditure
of the government, which was 3.3% of GDP in the year
1990-91 and reduced to 2.5 % of GDP in the year 1992-93.
It means, unproductive expenditure had been reduced during
these years. Budgetary deficit, which is the sum of revenue
deficit and capital deficit, had also decreased, because revenue
deficit was less than earlier. The concept of budgetary deficit
was discontinued in the year 1997-98.
53. Which of the following factors could potentially
contribute to stagflation in the Indian Economy?
1. High inflationary pressures due to increased
Government spending
2. Decline in industrial production and sluggish
economic growth
3. Decrease in aggregate demand and consumer
spending
4. Appreciation of the domestic currency leading to
reduction of export competitiveness
Select the correct answer using the codes given below.
(a) Only 1 and 2
(c) Only 1, 3 and 4
Stagflation or recession-inflation is a situation in which the
inflation rate is high or increasing, the economic growth rate
slows, and unemployment remains steadily high. All four
given factors could potentially contribute to stagflation in
the Indian Economy
54. Given below are two statements one is labelled as As
sertion (A) and other as Reason (R):
Assertion (A) : The government faces a tough time
tackling the bottleneck inflation.
Reason (R) : The situation is due to deficiencies existing in the economy such as supply bottleneck and
inefficient distribution.
Select the correct answer from the codes given below.
Codes :
(a) Both (A) and (R) are true and (R) is correct explanation
of (A)
(b) Both (A) and (R) are true, but (R) is not correct explanation of (A)
(c) (A) is true, but (R) is false
(d) (A) is false, but (R) is true
Ans. (a)
U.P.P.C.S. (Pre) 2021
Bottleneck inflation is the inflation that takes place when
supply falls drastically while demand remains at the same
level. This creates excess demand in the economy as the
supply cannot match it and thus results in rising of prices.
Such situations arise due to supply-side accidents, hazards,
mismanagement or inefficient distribution. The government
faces a tough time in this situation of inflation. Hence, both
Assertion and Reason are true and Reason is the correct
explanation of Assertion.
55. Consider the following statements regarding inflation :
Statement (A): Headline inflation refers to the rate
of change in the Consumer Price Index Number, a
measure of the average price of a standard basket of
goods and services consumed by a typical family.
Statement (B) : Core inflation measures the change
in average consumer prices after exctuding from the
Consumer Price Index certain items of volatile prices
such as food and fuel.
Of these statements,
(a) Neither (A) nor (B) is correct.
(b) Both (A) and (B) are correct.
(c) Only (B) is correct. (b) Only 2 and 3
(d) 1, 2, 3 and 4 (d) Only (A) is correct.
R.A.S./R.T.S. (Pre) 2023
69th B.P.S.C. (Pre) 2023
Ans. (d) Ans. (b)
Economic & Social Development General Studies E-233
Headline inflation refers to the rate of change in the Consumer
Price Index (CPI) Number, which represents the average cost
of a standard basket of goods and services consumed by a
typical household. Hence, statement (A) is correct
Core inflation measures the change in average consumer
prices after excluding from the CPI certain items of volatile
prices such as food and fuel. Hence, statement (B) is also
correct.
56. Core inflation is defined as :
(a) Headline inflation excluding only fuel inflation.
(b) Food inflation and fuel inflation.
Headline inflation excluding only food inflation (c)
(d) Headline inflation excluding both food inflation and
fuel inflation.
Ans. (d)
U.P.P.C.S. (Mains) 2017
Core inflation represents the long run trend in the price
level and in measuring long run inflation, transitory price
changes should be excluded. Thus, core inflation is an
inflation measure which excludes transitory or temporary
price volatility as in the case of some commodities such as
food items, fuel products etc. Hence, core inflation is defined
as headline inflation excluding both food inflation and fuel
inflation.
57. A measure of the total inflation within an economy,
including such as food and energy prices is called :
(a) Headline inflation
(c) Refined core inflation
Ans. (a)
(b) Core inflation
(d) None of these
Uttrakhand P.C.S. (Pre) 2024
Headline inflation measures the total inflation rate,
encompassing price changes for all goods and services in
the economy, including volatile items like food and energy.
Core inflation, in contrast, provides an indicator of underlying
trends of inflation by excluding these volatile food and fuel
prices from the calculation.
58. Which of the following statements is/are correct in
respect of inflation in India?
A. Core inflation include the prices of food and energy.
B. Headline inflation exclude food inflation.
C. Headline inflation is more volatile in nature than
core inflation.
Select the answer using the codes given below:
(a) A and B only
(c) B and C only
(b) A and C only
(d) Only C
R.A.S/R.T.S. (Pre) 2024
Headline inflation is a comprehensive measure of total price
increases in an economy, including food and energy, while
core inflation excludes thesevolatile components, providing
a more stable view of underlying prices trends.Essentially.
healine inflation captures the overall cost of living, while
core inflation focuses on the trend of inflation excluding
short-term fluctuations in certain goods. Core inflation is les
volatile than headline inflation as it removes the short-term
fluctuations in food and energy prices. Hence, only staterment
Cis correct.
59. Tick mark which is incorrect about inflation :
(a) Inflation indicates the rise in the price of a basket of
commodities ona point-to-point basis.
(b) The inflation rate in India is calculated on the basis of
the wholesale price index.
(c) For some commodities retail price are also considered
for measurement of inflation.
(d) Inflation rate going down does not mean prices are
declining.
Ans. (b)
R.A.S./R.T.S. (Pre) 2008
As per the question period, option (c) was the correct answer,
while at present option (b) is the right answer. In India, Consumer Price Index (CPI) and Wholesale Price Index (WPI)
are two major indices for measuring inflation. The WPI was
main index of inflation in India till April 2014, when Reserve
Bank of India (RBI) adopted new CPI (Combined) as the key
measure of inflation. It is noteworthy that WPI is based on
wholesale prices for primary articles, administered prices for
fuel items and ex-factory prices for manufactured products,
while CPI is based on retail prices and it measures change
over time in general level of prices of goods and services that
households acquire for the purpose of consumption.
60. On what basis is the inflation rate measured in India?
(a) Consumer Price Index
(b) Wholesale Price Index
(c) Labour Cost of Living index
(d) All of the above
Ans. (d)
Jharkhand P.C.S. (Pre) 2011
In India, the rate of inflation is generally measured on the
basis of Consumer Price Index (CPI), Wholesale Price Index
(WPI) and Labour Cost of Living Index. At present, RBI
uses Consumer Price Index (CPI) (Combined) as the key
Ans. (d) measure of inflation.
Economic & Social Development General Studies E-234
of. The most common measure of estimating inflation in 65. Which of the following fixed the four percent inflation
target in India with tolerance level of +/ 2 percent India is:
(a) Price Index
(b) Wholesale Price Index
(c) Consumer Price Index
(d) Price Index of Industrial Goods
Ans. (c)
I.A.S. (Pre) 1997
U.P.P.C.S.(Pre) 2012
U.P.P.C.S. (Mains) 2008
U.P. Lower Sub. (Spl.) (Pre) 2004
At present, RBI uses Consumer Price Index (CРІ)
(Combined) to measure headline inflation and its base year
s2024 =100. The Wholesale Price Index (WPI) was main
index of inflation in India till April 2014, when RBI adopted
new CPI (combined) as the key measure of inflation.
62. In India, headline inflation is based on :
(a) Consumer Price Index-Combined (CPI-C)
(b) Consumer Food Price Index (CFPI)
(c) Consumer Price Index - Rural Labourers (CPI-RL)
(d) Wholesale Price Index (WPI)
Ans. (a)
Jharkhand P.C.S. (Pre) 2021
See the explanation of above question.
63. Headline inflation refers to the change in value of all
goods on the basket. On which basis is the headline
inflation measured?
(a) Wholesale Price Index
(b) Consumer Price Index for Industrial Worker
for the period 2016 to 20217
(a) Reserve Bank of India
(b) Government of India
(c) NITI Aayog
(d) Fourteenth Finance Commission
Ans. (b)
R.A.S./R.T.S. (Pre) 2018
In May 2016, the Reserve Bank of India (RBI) Act, 1934 was
amended to provide a statutory basis for the implementation
of the flexible inflation targeting framework. The amended
RBI Act also provides for the inflation target to be set by
the Government of India, in consultation with the Rescrve
Bank, once in every five years. Accordingly, the Central
Government has notified in the Official Gazette 4 percent
Consumer Price Index (CPI) inflation target with tolerance
level of +/-2 percent for the period from 5 August, 2016
to 31 March, 2021.
Prior to the amendment in the RBI Act in May, 2016 the
flexible inflation targeting framework was governed by an
Agreement on Monetary Policy Framework between the
Government and the RBI of 20 February, 2015.
Note: The Government of India retained the CPI inflation
target at 4 percent (with the upper tolerance level of 6 percent
and the lower tolerance level of 2 percent) for the five year
period 1 April, 2021 to 31 March, 2026. In March, 2026, the
Government of India again retained the same CPI inflation
target at 4 percent (with a tolerance band of +/-2 percent) for
the five year period from 1 April, 2026 to 31 March, 2031.
(c) Combined Consumer Price Index 66.
(d) Urban Consumer Price Index
U.P.P.C.S. (Pre) 2021
According to the Reserve Bank of India (RBI), what
is the forecast for headline inflation in Financial Year
2025?
A'ns. (c) (a) 5.0% (b) 4.1%
See the explanation of above question. (c) 5.5% (d) 4.5%
64. In India, inflation is measured by the : 70th B.P.S.C. (Pre) 2024
(a) Wholesale Price Index Number Ans. (*)
(b) Consumer Price Index for urban non-manual workers
(c) Consumer Price Index for agricultural labourers
(d) National Income Deflator
Ans. (a)
R.A.S./R.T.S. (Pre) 2013
As per the question period option (a) was the correct answer.
See the explanation of above question.
Economic & Social Development
In the question period, the Reserve Bank of India (RBI) has
projected inflation rates for the financial years 2025 and 2026
to be 4.5% and 4.1%, respectively. The RBI in its Monetary
Policy Report of 5 June, 2026, has lowered the headline CPI
inflation forecast for FY 2026-27 to 5.1%, up from earlier
projection of 4.6 in April, 2026. It is to be noted that BPSC
has deleted this question in its final answer key.
General Studies E-235
67. The annual rate of inflation in India during the
1991 calendar year based on the monthly average of
the Wholesale Price Index was ;
(a) 12.7%
(c) 14.2
Ans. (a)
(b) 13.5%
(d) 14.5%
R.A.S./R.T.S. (Pre) 1992
Inflation is the rate at which the value of currency is falling
and consequently the general level of prices of goods and
services is rising. The annual rate of inflation in India during
the 1991 calender year based on the monthly average of the
Wholesale Price Index (WPI) was about 12.7%. Average
annual wholesale inflation rates based on WPI (Base Year
2011-12) during the recent financial years are as follows:
Inflation (in Percent)
1.3
13.0
Year (April-March)
2020-21
2021-22
2022-23 9.41
2023-24 - (-)0.73
2024-25 2.27
2025-26 (Provisional) 0.71
68. Consider the following statements:
1. The weightage of food in Consumer Price Index
(CPI) is higher than that in Wholesale Price Index
(WPI).
2. The WPI does not capture changes in the prices of
services, which CPI does.
3. Reserve Bank of India has now adopted WPI as its
key measure of Inflation and to decide on changing
the key policy rates.
Which of the statements given above is/are correct?
(a) 1 and 2 only
(c) 3 only
Ans. (a)
(b) 2 only
(d) 1, 2 and 3 only
I.A.S. (Pre) 2020
Consumer Price Index (CPI), also known as the cost of
living index, measures the average change in retail prices.
The weightage of food (food articles and products) in CPI
(Combined) is 45.9%, while in Wholesale Price Index, it is
24.4%. Hence, statement (1) is also correct.
WPI measures the changes in the prices of goods sold and
traded in bulk of wholesale business to other business. So, it does not include services. While, CPI includes both goods
and services. Hence, statement (2) is also correct.
On the recommendation of Urjit R. Patel Committee, the
RBI has adopted CPI (Combined) as its key measure of
inflation and to decide on changing the key policy rates, since
April 1, 2014. Hence, statement (3) is incorrect
69. Consider the following statements with respect to
Consumer Price Index and select the correct answer
from the codes given below:
1. It computes price changes in both goods and services.
2. It iscomputed by the Office of EconomicAdvisor (OEA
Department of Industrial Policy and Promotion.
3. It is taken as the measure of inflation while
formulating Monetary Policy by RBI.
Codes:
(a) l and 2
(c) 1 and 3
Ans. (c)
(b) 2 and
(d) Only I
3
U.P.B.E.O. (Pre) 2019
Consumer Price Index (CPI) is a comprehensive measure
used for estimation of price changes in a basket of goods
and services representative of consumption expenditure. It is
designed to measure the changes over time in general level of
retail prices of selected goods and services that households
purchase for the purpose of consumption. In India, segment
specific CPIS, namly CPI (IW- for Industrial Workers), CPI
(AL-for Agricultural Labourers) and CPI (RL- for Rural
Labourers) are compiled by the Labour Bureau, while CPI
(Urban), CPI (Rural) and CPI (Combined; Urban + Rural)
are compiled and released by the National Statistical Office
(NSO). СРI (Combined) is taken as the measure of inflation
while formulating Monetary Policy by the RBI/MРС.
Hence Statement 1 and 3 are correct while Statement 2 is
incorrect.
Wholesale Price Index (WPI) is computed and released by
the Office of Economic Advisor (OEA), Department for
Promotion of Industry and Internal Trade (formerly DIPP).
Ministry of Commerce and Industry.
70. Consider the following consumer price index:
I. Consumer Price Index for Industrial Workers.
II. Consumer Price Index for Agricultural Labourers.
III. Consumer Price Index for Rural Workers.
IV. Consumer Price Index for Urban Non-Manual
Employees.
In the given indexes, which is/are compiled by Central
Statistics Office (CSO)?
(a) Only III and IV
(c) Only IV
(b) Only I, II and II1
(d) I, II, III and IV
56th to 59th B.P.S.C. (Pre) 2015
Ans. (*)
Economic & Social Development General Studies E-236
CPI for Industrial Workers (CPI-IW), CPI for Agricultural
Labourers (CPI-AL) and CPI for Rural Labourers (CPI-RL)
indexes are compiled by Labour Bureau in the Ministry of
Labour and Employment.While CPI for Urban Non-Manual
Employees (CPI-UNME) was earlier computed by CSO,
which was totally discontinued since January, 2011. The
CPI-Urban and CPI-Rural and CPI-Combined Indexes are
compiled by the National Statistical Office (NSO) in the
Ministry of Statistics and Programme implementation.
11. Which ofthe following brings out the ‘Consumer Price
Index Number for Industrial Workers'?
(a) The Reserve Bank of India
(b) The Department of Economic Affairs
(c) The Labour Bureau
(d) The Department of Personnel and Training
Ans. (c)
See the explanation of above question.
I.A.S. (Pre) 2010
72. The base of Consumer Price Index for industrial workers has been shifted from 1982 to :
(a) 2002
(c) 2000
Ans. (b)
(b) 2001
(d) 1998
U.P.P.C.S. (Mains) 2008
The Consumer Price Index for Industrial Workers (CPIIW) is compiled by the Labour Bureau under the Ministry
of Labour and Employment. The base year of CPI-IW has
been revised from 2001 to 2016 with effect from September,
2020 to reflect the changing consumption pattern. The job
of compilation and maintenance of CPI-IW was taken over
by the Central Government in 1941. After that, the Labour
Bureau has been compiling and maintaining the CPI-IW
since 1944. However, All India CPI-IW was first introduced
on uniform and scientific lines with base year 1960 = 100
which was based on the results of Family Living Survey
conducted in 1958-59. The series was then updated in 1988
on base year 1982 = 100 and a revision in 2006 has further
updated the base year to 2001 = 100. The current base year for
the CPI-IW is 2016 (2016 = 100), which has been effective
from September, 2020.
73. Industrial Consumer Price Index year 1960 was
changed to which base year?
(a) 1971
(c) 1982
Ans. (c)
See the explanation of above question.
74. Which of the following price index is used to compensate the wages of Central Government employees?
(a) Wholesale Price Index
(b) Consumer Price Index for Industrial Workers
(c) Consumer Price Index for Agricultural Labourers
(d) None of the above
Ans. (b)
U.P.U.D.A./L.D.A. (Pre) 2001
Consumer Price Index for Industrial Workers (CPI-IW) is used
to compensate the wages of Central Government employees.
It is generally argued that WPI inflation is not an appropriate
index to determine the impact of price rise on the cost of
living of the common man. Rather, the Consumer Price Index
for Industrial Workers (CPI-IW), which also includes selected
services and is measured on the basis of retail prices, and is
mainly used for regulation of dearness allowance and wages
of workers and employees belonging to Central Government,
State Governments, public and private sector establishments,
is the appropriate indicator of general inflation. Food items
have higher weights in CPI-IW than in WPI.
75. The basis of determining dearness allowance to
employees of India is :
(a) National Income
(b) Consumer Price Index
(c) Standard of Living
(d) Per Capita Income
Ans. (b)
Uttarakhand U.D.A./L.D.A. (Pre) 2007
U.P.P.C.S. (Mains) 2008
U.P. Lower Sub. (Pre) 2008
In India, Consumer Price Index for Industrial Workers (CPIIW) is used for tracking inflation and for fixing dearness
allowance (DA) of employees in public and private sector
in India.
76. Which of the following Institution/Office bring out the
Wholesale Price Index (WPI) data in India?
(a) The Reserve Bank of India
(b) The Ministry of Commerce and Industry
(c) The Ministry of Finance
(d) The Ministry of Consumer Affairs Food and Public
Distribution
(b) 1980
(d) 1990
U.P.P.C.S. (Pre) 1990
Ans. (b)
U.P.P.C.S. (Pre) 2021
The Wholesale Price Index (WPI) series is compiled by the
Office of Economic Adviser (OEA), Ministry of Commerce
and Industry, on a weekly basıs, based on the price quotations collected by the official as well as non-official source
agencies on selected items and commodities identified in
the basket of the index. At present, the base year for the
Wholesale Price Index (WPI) is 2011-12.
Note: The WPI is currently undergoing a base year revision
from 2011-12 to 2022-23. As of February, 2026, a high level
working group led by Ramesh Chand (Member, NITI Aayog)
is finalizing the transition.
77. With reference to the Wholesale Price Index (WPI),
consider the following statements:
1. The new WPI series with base year 1993-94 = 100
became effective from April, 1998.
2. In the new WPI series, the weight for primary
articles has gone down by 10 percentage points.
3. The weight for electricity has increased in the new
WPI series.
Which of these statements are correct?
(a) 1, 2 and 3
(c) 1 and З
Ans. (b)
(b) 2 and
(d) 1 and 2
I.A.S. (Pre) 2002
The new Wholesale Price Index (WPI) series with the base
1993-94 = 100 was introduced in April, 2000 and not in
April, 1998. Thus, Statement 1 is incorrect while Statements
2 and 3 were correct as per that WPI series. On 12 May, 2017
(effective from April, 2017) the base year of the Wholesale
Price Index (WPI) has been revised from 2004-05 to 2011-
12. In the revised WPI basket the weight of Primary articles
is 22.62%, whereas the weight of fuel and power is 13.15%
and weight of manufactured products is 64.23 percent.
Note: The WPI is currently undergoing a base year revision
|from 2011-12 to 2022-23. As of February, 2026, a high level
working group led by Ramesh Chand (Member, NITI Aayog)
is finalizing the transition.
78. What is the weightage (in percent) of manufactured
products in calculation of Wholesale Price Index (WPI)?
(a) 62.43%
(c) 63.43%
Ans. (b)
(b) 64.23%
(d) 60.23%
Chhattisgarh P.C.S. (Pre) 2021
See the explanation of above question.
79. In calculation of Index of wholesale prices which one of
the following sectors is assigned maximum weightage?
(a) Food articles
(b) Non-food articles
Economic & Social Development
(c) Fuel, power, light and lubricants
(d) Manufactured products
Ans. (d)
U.P.P.C.S. (Mains) 2008
See the explanation of above question
80. The new WPI series was introduced on:
(a) 1 April, 2010
(c) 15 August, 2010
Ans. (d)
(b) I July, 2010
(d) 14 September, 2010
U.P.P.C.S. (Mains) 2009
As per the question period, the new Wholesale Price Indez
(WPI) series was introduced with effect from 14 September.
2010. The base year of this WPI series was 2004-05. On 12
May, 2017 (effective from April, 2017) the base year of the
WPI has been revised from 2004-05 to 2011-12.
The WPI is currently undergoing a base year revision from
2011-12 to 2022-23.
81. The base year for All-India Wholesale Price Index
(WPI) has been changed by the Government of India
from 2004-05 to :
(a) 2010-11
(c) 2012-13
(b) 2011-12
(d) 2013-14
(e) None of the above/More than one of the above
63rd B.P.S.C. (Pre) 2017
Ans. (b)
See the explanation of above question.
82. On which date was the new Wholesale Price Index with
2004-05 as the base year released?
(a) 14 September, 2010
(c) 1 January, 2011
Ans. (a)
(b) 2 October, 2010
(d) 1 April, 2011
U.P.P.C.S. (Mains) 2011
See the explanation of above question.
83. The new series ofWholesale Price Index (WPI) released
by the Government of India is with reference to the
base prices of:
(a) 1981-82
(c) 1993-94
Ans. (c)
(b) 1990-91
(d) 1994-95
I.A.S. (Pre) 2001
As per the question period, the new series of Wholesale Price
Index (WPI) released by the Government of India was with
reference to the base prices of 1993-94, previously it was
| 1981-82. At present, 2011-12 is used as the base year of WPI.
The WPI is currently undergoing a base year revision from 2011-12 to 2022-23.
General Studies E-238
84. In October 2009, a decision has been taken that the base year of Wholesale Price Index (WPI) has been shifted from 1993-94 to :
(a) 2001-2002
(c) 2003-2004
Ans. (d)
(b) 2002-2003
(d) 2004-2005
U.P.P.C.S. (Pre) 2009
On 19 October, 2009, CCEA had decided to shift the base
vear of WPI from 1993-94 to 2004-05 and its data release
on monthly basis. The new series of WPI base year 2004-05
was introduced with effect from September, 2010. This WPI
series was implemented on the recommendation of Abhijit
Sen Committee.
85. With reference to India, considerthe following statements:
1. The Wholesale Price Index (WPI) in India is
available on a monthly basis only.
2. As compared to Consumer Price Index for Industrial Workers [CPI (IW)] the WPI gives less weight
to food articles.
Which of the statements given above is/are correct?
(a) 1 only
(c) Both 1 and 2
Ans. (c)
(b) 2 only
(d) Neither 1 nor 2
I.A.S. (Pre) 2010
In October, 2009, the government decided on discontinuing
the releasing of weekly inflation data based on Wholesale
Price Index for 'All Commodities' and 'Manufactured Products'.Although till January 2012, the government continued
to release Wholesale Price Index for 'Primary Articles' and
'Fuel & Power' datas on weekly basis. Hence, as per the question period, statement (1) was incorrect. But from February
2012, the WPI in India is available on a monthly basis only
for all item groups. Therefore, Statement 1 is correct in the
present context. Statement (2) is correct, because in India
as compared to Consumer Price Index for Industrial Workers
[CPI (IW)], the WPI gives less weight to food articles. Hence,
in the present context, option (c) is the correct answer.
86. The current price index (base 1960) is nearly 330.
This means that :
(a) all items cost 3.3 times more than what they did in
1960
(b) the prices of certain selected items have gone upto
3.3 times
(c) weighted mean of prices ofcertain items has increased
3.3 times
(d) gold price has gone up 3.3 times
I.A.S. (Pre) 1998
Price index is a measure that examines the weighted average
of prices of a basket of certain consumer goods and services.
Given that the current price index (base year 1960 =100) is
nearly 330. It means that the weighted mean (average) of
prices of certain items has increased 3.3 times.
87. Producer Price Index measures:
(a) the average change in the prices of produced goods
and services.
(b) the marginal change in the prices of produced goods
and services
(c) the total change in the prices of produced goods and
services.
(d) None of the above.
Ans. (a)
U.P. R.O.JA.R.O. (Pre) 2017
Producer Price Index (PPI) measures the average change
in the prices of goods and services either as they leave the
place of production, called output PPI or as they enter the
production process, called input PPI. PPI estimates the
change in average prices that a producer receives.
88. Assertion (a) : Cost push inflation is caused by shift in
aggregate supply curve.
Reason (R): Shift in aggregate supply curve takes place
because of increase in wages.
(a) Both (A) and (R) are true and (R) is the correct
explanation of (A).
(b) Both (A) and (R) are true, but (R) is not the correct
explanation of (A).
(c) (A) is true, but (R) is false.
(d) (A) is false, but (R) is true.
Ans. (a)
R.A.S./R.T.S. (Pre) 2018
Cost push inflation is caused by shift or decrease in aggregate
supply curve while increase in wages is the reason for shift
(left side) or decrease in aggregate supply curve. Hence,
both assertion and reason are true and reason is the correct
explanation of assertion.
89. Consider the following statements :
Statement-I : In the post-pandemic recent past, many
Central Banks worldwide had carried out interest rate
hikes.
Statement-II : Central Banks generally assume that
they have the ability to counteract the rising consumer
Ans. (c) prices via monetary policy means.
Economic & Social Development General Studies E-239
Which one of the following is correct in respect of the
above statements?
(a) Both Statement-I and Statement-I1 are correct and
Statement-Il is the correct explanation for Statement-1
(b) Both Statement-1 and Statement-II are correct and
Statement-Il is not the correct explanation for
Statement-I
(c) Statement-I is correct but Statement-II is incorrect
(d) Statement-I is incorrect but Statement-II is correct
Ans. (a)
I.A.S. (Pre) 2023
In the post-pandemic recent past, many Central Banks
worldwide had carried out interest rate hikes to contain
the post-pandemic inflation. A study by the World Bank,
published in 2022, has revealed that with the Central Banks
across the world simultaneously hiking interest rates in
response to inflation, the world may be edging toward a global
recession and a string of financial crises in emerging markets
and developing economies that would do them lasting harm.
The report said that the Central Banks around the world have
been raising interest rates that year (in 2022) with a degree
of synchronicity not seen over the past five decades.
Central Banks use monetary policy to manage economic
fluctuations and achieve price stability. Central Banks
generally assume that they have the ability to counteract
the rising consumer prices via monetary policy means i.e.
by increasing interest rates. They are doing the same to
contain the post-pandemic inflation. Hence, both statements
are correct and Statement-II is the correct explanation of
Statement-I.
90. Which one of the following is NOT a method to control
inflation?
(a) Controlling the demand
(b) Controlling the supply of money
(c) Reducing the rate of interest
(d) Rationing of commodities
Ans. (c)
U.P.P.C.S. (Pre) 1996
Reducing the rate of interest is a measure of expansionary
monetary policy and it is not a method to control inflation.
Inflation can be controlled by a contractionary monetary
policy which is a common method of managing inflation.
The aim of contractionary policy is to reduce the supply of
money within the economy by lowering the prices of bonds
and rising the interest rates. Thus consumption falls, prices
fall and inflation slows down. Measures to control inflation
are as follows:
Economic & Social Development
1. Monetary Measures:
2.
3.
Increasing the rate of interest
Credit control
Controlling the money supply
Demonitization of currency
Fiscal Measures :
Reduction in unnecessary expenditure
Increase in Taxes
Increase in Savings
Surplus Budget
Public debt
Other Measures
To increase production
Rational wage policy
Price control
Rationing
Controlling the demand
91. With reference to inflation in India, which of the
following statements is correct?
(a) Controlling the inflation in India is the responsibility
of the Government of India only.
(b) The Reserve Bank of India has no role in controlling
the inflation.
(c) Decreased money circulation helps in controlling the
inflation.
(d) Increased money circulation helps in controlling the
inflation.
Ans. (c)
I.A.S. (Pre) 2015
| Increasing the money supply faster than the growth in real
output will cause inflation. The reason is that there is more
money chasing the same number of goods. Therefore, the
increase in monetary demand causes firms to put up prices.
In this situation, the RBI through monetary policy tries to
reduce the expansion of money because decreased money
circulation (liquidity) helps in controlling the inflation.
92. India has experienced persistent and high food inflation
in the recent past. What could be the reasons?
1. Due to a gradual switch over to the cultivation of
commercial crops, the area under the cultivation
of food grains has steadily decreased in the last five
years by about 30%.
2. As a consequence of increasing incomes, the
consumption patterns of the people have undergone
a significant change.
3. The food supply chain has structural constraints.
General Studies E-240
Which of the statements given above are correct ?
(a) 1 and 2 only
(c) 1 and 3 only
Ans. (b)
(b) 2 and 3 only
(d) 1. 2, and 3
I.A.S. (Pre) 2011
During the preceding five years of the question period the
area under the cultivation of foodgrains had not steadily
decreased. Hence, statement 1 is incorrect. Statement 2 and
3 are correct.
3. Assertion (A) : Between October 2009 and February
2010 the inflation rate in India was negative.
Reason (R) : Petrol price had come down from 140 $
a barrel to 30 $ a barrel in the global market.
Select the correct answer from the codes given below:
Codes :
(a) Both (A) and (R) are true, and (R) is the correct
explanation of (A).
(b) Both (A) and (R) are true, but (R) is not the correct
explanation of (A).
(c) (A) is true, but (R) is false.
(d) (A) is false, but (R) is true.
Ans. (a)
U.P. U.D.A./L.D.A. (Pre) 2010
As per the question period, both assertion (A) and reason
(R) were correct and reason (R) was the correct explanation
of assertion (A).
94. In India, the first Bank of limited liability managed by
Indians and founded in 1881 was :
(a) Hindustan Commercial Bank
(b) Oudh Commercial Bank
(c) Punjab National Bank
(d) Punjab and Sind Bank
Ans. (b)
I.A.S. (Pre) 2003
Oudh Commercial Bank was an Indian bank established in
1881 in Faizabad and operated until 1958 when it failed.
It was the first commercial bank in India having limited
liability and an entirely Indian board of directors. India's
first Swadeshi bank is Punjab National Bank, which was
founded in 1894 and commenced its operation on April 12,
1895 from Lahore, Pakistan.
95. With reference to India, consider the following :
1. Nationalization of Banks
2. Formation of Regional Rural Banks
3. Adoption of villages by Bank Branches
Which of the above can be considered as steps taken
to achieve the 'financial inclusion' in India 2
(a) l and 2 only
(c) 3only
Ans. (d)
(h) 2 and 3 only
(d) 1. 2 and
LA.S. (Pre) 2010
U.P.P.C.S. (Pre) 202
All of the above can be considered as steps taken to ach
the 'financial inclusion in India. Nationalization targeted the
expansion of bank branches in rural areas and also a contro
on concentration of economic powers in the few hands RR
and Lead Bank Scheme were planned to cater the needsof
the rural areas
96. Which of the following is not associated with financial
sector reforms in India initiated after 1991?
(a) Capital adequacy
(b) Non-performing assets
(c) F.R.B.M. Act (Fiscal Responsibility and Budyct
Management)
(d) SARFAESI Act
Ans. (c)
R.A.S/R.T.S. (Pre) 2024
Among the given options, option (c) FRBM Act is not
associated with financial sector reforms in India initiated afler
1991. The Fiscal Responsibility and Budget Management
(FRBM) Act, 2003, is an Indian legislation aimed at ensuring
fiscal discipline and long-term macroeconomic stability It
seeks to achieve this by setting targets for reducing fiscal deficits, limiting government borrowing, and promoting
transparency in fiscal operations. The Act also aims to ensure
inter-generational equity in fiscal management. Capital
adequacy, non-performing assets and SARFAESI Act are associated with financial sector reforms.
97. In the context of independent India's economy, which
one of the following was the earliest event to take place?
(a) Nationalization of insurance companies
(b) Nationalization of State Bank of India
(c) Enactment of Banking Regulation Act
(d) Introduction of first Five Year Plan
Ans. (c)
I.A.S. (Pre) 2009
U.P.P.C.S. (Mains) 2016
Life insurance companies were nationalized in 1956 and
general insurance companies were nationalized in 1972
While State Bank of India was nationalized in July, 1955 and
Banking Regulation Act came into force on 10 March, 1949
The first Five Year Plan was commenced in 1951. Hence.
option (c) is the correct answer.
Economic & Social Development General Studies E-241
98. The Government of India has nationalized 14 banks
of the country in :
(a) Julv, 1969
(c) March, 1981
Ans. (a)
(b) August, 1971
(d) July, 1991
Chhattisgarh P.C.S. (Pre) 2011
U.P.P.C.S. (Mains) 2014
M.P.P.C.S. (Pre) 2014
U.P.P.C.S. (Pre) 1996, 2007
U.P.U.D.A./L.D.A. (Pre) 2006
Uttarakhand U.D.A./L.D.A. (Pre) 2007
On July 19,1969, the Government of India had nationalized
14 major private commercial banks, whose assets size was
above Rs. 50 crore. Again on 15 April 1980, another six
major private commercial banks were nationalized by the
Government of India.
99. How many banks were nationalized in India in 1980?
(a) 4
(c) 14
Ans. (b)
(b) 6
(d) 20
See the explanation of above question.
M.P. P.C.S. (Pre) 2023
100. Consider the following events and arrange them in
chronological order with the help of code given below :
I. First phase of Bank Nationalization
II. Second phase of Bank Nationalization
III.Establishment of Regional Rural Banks
IV. Establishment of NABARD
Code:
(a) I, III, II, IV (b) III, II, I, IV
(d) I, II, IV, III
Codes:
(a) 3, 2, 4, 1
(c) 3, 4, 2, 1
(e) None of these
Ans. (a)
Institution
3. Nationalization of RBI
(b) 2, 3, 4, 1
(d) 4, 3, 2, 1
Chhattisgarh P.C.S. (Pre) 20Year
1949
2. Nationalization of SBI 1955
4. Nationalization of LIC 1956
1. Nationalization of 14 major banks 1969
Hence, the correct chronological order is 3, 2, 4, 1.
102. Consider the following statements :
1. Gorewala Committee’s recommendation led toestablishment of State Bank of India.
2. Six Commercial Banks were nationalized on A15, 1980.
Which one of the statements given above is/are corre(a) 1 only
(c) Both 1 and 2
Ans. (c)
(b) 2 only
(d) Neither 1 nor 2
U.P.P.C.S. (Spl.) (Mains) 20The All-India Rural Credit Survey Committee, which is alsknown as A.D. Gorewala Committee had recommended
the establishment of State Bank of India through combininthe Imperial Bank of India and some State's affliated banksThe six commercial banks were nationalized on April 151980 by the Government of India. Hence, both of the givemstatements are correct.
103. The number of public sector banks in India (excludiState Bank of India Group) is presently:
(c) IV, II, III, I (a) 28
U.P. R.O./A.R.O. (Pre) 2023 (c) 20
Ans. (a)
Ans. (*)
(b) 27
(d) 19
U.P.P.C.S. (Mains) 20The chronological order of the given events is as follows:
First phase of Bank Nationalization -
1969
Establishment of Regional Rural Banks - 1975
Second phase of Bank Nationalization - 1980
Establishment of NABARD 1982
Hence, option (a) is the correct answer.
101. Arrange the following in chronological order :
1. Nationalization of 14 major banks
2. Nationalization of SBI
3. Nationalization of RBI
4. Nationalization of LIC
Economic & Social Development
As per the question period, the total number of public sectebanks in India (excluding SBI Group) was 20. To improwthe condition of public sector banks, the Modi governmenadopted the process of merger in two different phases. Ithe first phase, five Associate Banks of SBI (and BharatiyaMahila Bank) were merged with the country's largest publicsector bank State Bank of India. Apart from this,Vijaya Bankand Dena Bank were merged with Bank of Baroda. In additiosto this,subsequent to the enhancement ofequity stake by LiCof India, the then public sector IDBI Bank was re-categorizesas a private sector bank for regulatory purposes with effectGeneral Studies E-24
þanks were merged with effect from April 1, 2020. A total of
rom 21 January, 2019. In the second phase, 10 public sector
x weak banks were merged into four big banks. Oriental
Bank of Commerce and United Bank of India were merged
SIX
with Punjab National Bank. Allahabad Bank was merged with Indian Bank. Syndicate Bank was merged with Canara
Bank.Andhra Bank and Corporation Bankwere merged with Union Bank of India.
Atpresent, there are 12 public sector scheduled commercial banks(including State Bank of India) in the country. List of Public Sector Banks
State Bank of India
Bank of Baroda 12
Bank of India
Bank of Maharashtra 4
5. Canara Bank
6 Central Bank of India
17. Indian Bank
8. Indian Overseas Bank
0 Punjab National Bank
10. Punjab & Sind Bank
11. Union Bank of India
12. UCO Bank
104. The recent amalgamation of public sector banks in
India is aimed at multiple gains.
1. Economies of scale
2. Improved access to capital
3. Covering larger geographical areas
4. Banks of global size
Select the correct benefits using the codes given below:
Codes:
(a) 1 and 2 only
(c) 1, 2 and 4 only
Ans. (d)
(b) 2 and 3 only
(d) 1, 2, 3 and 4 all
U.P.B.E.O. (Pre) 2019
in the biggest consolidation exercise in the banking space,
ihe government in August, 2019 had announced the
amalgamation of 10 public sector banks into 4 bigger and
stronger banks. This merger came into effect from April 1,
2020. After this, the total number of public sector banks
|(including SBI) is reduced to 12. The amalgamation of public
sector banks has following significant benefits: Economies of scale:
• Improve access to capital: Covering larger geographical areas: Banks of global size; Reducing operational risks;
• Concentrated payment and greater settlement flows;
Better management of banking capital, etc.
Economic & Social Development
105. With reference to the governance ofpublic sector banking
in India, consider the following statements:
1. Capital infusion into public sector banks by the
Government of India has steadily increased in the
last decade.
2. To put the public sector banks in order, the merger
of associate banks with the parent State Bank of
India has been affected.
Which of the statements given above is/are correct?
(a) 1 only
(c) Both 1 and 2
Ans. (b)
(b) 2 only
(d) Neither 1 nor 2
I.A.S. (Pre) 2018
In the period between 2008-09 and 2016-17, Government
of India infused cumulatively Rs. 1,18,724 crore in public
sector banks. But yearwise capital infusion has not steadily
increased in this period, there have been falls in between.
Thus, statement 1 is incorrect.
Merger of five Associate Banks of SBI and Bharatiya Mahila
Bank (BMB) in State Bank of India has been affected in
2017 to put the public sector banks in order. One of the
desired objectives of consolidation of public sector banks
is to improve their efficiency and streamlining of banking
operations. Hence, statement 2 is also correct.
106. With reference to 'EASE-Index', which of the following
statements is/are correct?
1. It is a way to measure the performance of the public
sector banks.
2. It measures the ease of doing business of MSMES
in India.
Select the correct answer using the code given below -
Code:
(a) Only 1 (b) Only 2
(c) Both 1 and 2 (d) Neither 1 nor 2
U.P. R.O./A.R.O. (Mains) 2021
Ans. (a)
'EASE-Index' (Ease Banking Reforms Index) is a way to
measure the performance of the public sector banks. The
EASE (Enhanced Access and Service Excellence) is a
notable reform agenda for public sector banks that aims to
strengthen banking.
107. Consider the following statements:
The functions of commercial banks in India include
1. Purchase and sale of shares and securities on behalf
of customers.
2. Acting as executors and trustees of wills.
General Studies E-243
Which of the statements given above is/are correct?
(a) 1 only
(c) Both 1 and 2
Ans. (c)
(b) 2 only
(d) Neither 1 nor 2
1.A.S. (Pre) 2010
A commercial bank is a kind of financial institution which
carries all the operations related to deposits and withdrawal
of money for the general public, providing loans for investment etc. Other functions of the commercial bank are
purchase and sale of shares and securities on behalf of
customers and acting as executors and trustees of wills.
108. Which of the following is the commercial bank of public
sector?
(a) ICICI
(c) Indian Overseas Bank
Ans. (c)
(b) H.D.F.C.
(d) U.T.I. bank
U.P.U.D.A./L.D.A. (Pre) 2006
In Public Sector Banks (PSBs), majority of stake (i.e. at least
51%) is held by the Government. State Bank of India, Indian
Overseas Bank, Punjab National Bank etc. are public sector
banks. At present, there are 12 public sector banks (including
State Bank of India) in the country.
109.Which of the following is a private bank?
(a) Allahabad Bank
(c) Bank of Punjab
Ans. (c)
(b) Punjab and Sind bank
(d) Punjab National Bank
U.P.U.D.A./L.D.A. (Pre) 2001
Among the given banks, Bank of Punjab was a private
bank. In 2005, Bank of Punjab and Centurion Bank have
been merged to from Centurian Bank of Punjab. At present,
Allahabad Bank is also merged with Indian Bank.
110. Which one of the following is not a nationalized bank?
(a) Bank of Baroda
(c) ICICI Bank
Ans. (c)
(b) Canara Bank
(d) Punjab National Bank
U.P.P.C.S. (Spl.) (Mains) 2004
ICICI (Industrial Credit and Investment Corporation of India)
was formed in 1955 at the initiative of the World Bank, the
Government of India and representatives of Indian Industry.
The principal objective was to create a development financial
institution for providing medium and long-term project
financing to Indian business. ICICI bank was incorporated
in 1994 as a part of the ICICI group. ICICI bank is a leading
private sector bank in India. In 1999, ICICI become the first
Indian company and the first bank or financial institution
from non-Japan Asia to be listed on the New York Stock
Exchange. Rest are nationalized Banks.
Economic & Social Development
111. Which one of the following Indian Banks is not
nationalized bank?
(a) Corporation Bank
(c) ICICT Bank
Ans. (c)
(b) Dena Bank
(d) Vijaya Bank
Uttarakhand Lower Sub. (Pre) 2010
See the explanation of above question. Dena Bank and Vijaya
Bank were merged with Bank of Baroda while CorporationBank was merged with Union Bank of India
112. When was the State Bank of India established?
(a) 1954
(c) 1956
Ans. (b)
(b) 1955
(d) 1957
M.P.P.C.S. (Pre) 2017
State Bank of India (SBI) was incorporated on 1 July, 1955.
The Government of India nationalized the Imperial Bank of
India in the year 1955 with the Reserve Bank of India taking
a 60% stake and name was changed to State Bank of India.
113. The largest commercial bank of India is :
(a) NABARD
(c) ICICI
Ans. (b)
(b) State Bank of India
(d) Union Bank of India
U.P.P.C.S. (Pre) 2005
U.P.P.C.S. (Mains) 2004
Uttarakhand U.D.A./L.D.A. (Pre) 2003
M.P.P.C.S. (Pre) 2016
State Bank of India, a Fortune 500 company, is an Indian
Multinational Public Sector Banking and Financial Services
Statutory body head-quartered in Mumbai. State Bank of
India is the largest banking and financial services organization
in India which serves over 50 crore customers through its vast
network of over 23,270 branches, 63,580 ATMs/ADWMs
and 82,900 BC outlets (as on 31 March, 2026).
114. The largest public sector commercial bank of India
is the:
(a) Bank of India
(c) State Bank of India
Ans. (c)
(b) Reserve Bank of India
(d) Union Bank of India
U.P.P.C.S. (Mains) 2003
See the explanation of above question.
115. Which of the following commercial banks of India
comes in top 100 global banks?
(a) ICICI Bank
(c) HDFC Bank
General Studies
(b) SBI
(d) Kotak Mahindra Bank
E-244
(c) None of the above More than one of the above
Ans. (b) & (с)
66h B.P.S.C. (Pre) 2020
Asper the report released by S & P Global Market Intelligence
in April 2020, India had only one bank in the top 100 global bank list (by total assets). State Bank of India (SBI) at 55th
position was the only Indian Bank in that list. SBI was at 47th rank in April, 2024 list. In April, 2026 list, SBI's rank is 45th among World's 100 largest banks while India-based HDFC Bank Ltd. is at 76th position. Hence, at present both (b) and (c) are correct
16. InFebruary 2024, which Bank was in news for raising $ 300 million through its first ever sustainable finance bond issue?
(a) HDFC
(c) AXIS Bank
Ans. (a)
(b) South Indian Bank
(d) Yes Bank
Uttrakhand P.C.S. (Pre) 2024
The HDFC Bank announced in February, 2024 that it has issued its first ever sustainable finance dollar-denominated
bond, raising USD 300 million as part of a larger USD
750 million senior notes issue (S Bonds). While USD 300
million has been raised for a tenure of three years with a
95 basic points spread over US Treasury, another USD 450 million has been raised for a tenure of 5 years, with a spread
of 108 basis points over US Treasury. These are the tightest credit spreads achieved by an Indian issuer for a three-year sustainable bond and five-year senior unsecured bond for
a similar size of USD Reg S issuance. The proceeds of the sustainable finance bond will be utilised for funding green
and social loans in accordance with the sustainable finance.
with a priority on lending for electric vehicles, small and
medium-sized enterprises (SMEs), and affordable housing
while the rest of the proceeds will go towards financing
general banking activities. The bonds are listed on the India
International Exchange (India INX) in GIFT IFSC.
117. Which one of the following bank has formed 'farmers
clubs' to reach out to the farmers easily?
(a) Allahabad Bank
(c) Regional Rural Bank
(b) Punjab National Bank
(d) State Bank of India
U.P. U.D.A./L.D.A. (Mains) 2010
U.P.P.C.S. (Spl.) (Pre) 2008
118. Since April, 2011, the SBI's Chairman has been:
(a) Pratip Chaudhuri
(c) Amiya Bagachi
Ans. (a)
(b) D. Subha Rao
(d) Rao Birendra Singh
U.P.P.C.S. (Mains) 2012
U.P.U.D.A./L.D.A. (Pre) 2006
Pratip Chaudhuri was the SBI's Chairman from 7 April, 2011
to 30 September, 2013. At present, Challa Sreenivasulu Setty
is the Chairman of SBI. He assumed office in August, 2024.
119. The Chairman of public sector banks are selected by
the:
(a) Banks Board Bureau
(b) Reserve Bank of India
(c) Union Ministry of Finance
(d) Management of concerned bank
Ans. (a)
I.A.S. (Pre) 2019
Chairmen and other top officials of public sector banks are
selected by the Bank Board Bureau (BBB-now replaced by
FSIB). The Bureau started functioning from April 01, 2016
as an autonomous recommendatory body. The Chairman of
BBB (now FSIB) is appointed by the Central Government.
Financial Services Institutions Bureau (FSIB) has been
constituted by the Central Government in place of BBB
with effect from 1 July, 2022. BBB (now FSIB) is tasked to
improve the governance of public sector banks, recommend
selection of top-level posts of public sectors banks and
financial institutions and to help PSBs, FIs and PSIs in developing business strategies and capital raising plans.
120. With reference to the 'Banks Board Bureau (BBB)',
which of the following statements are correct?
1. The Governor of RBI is the Chairman of BBB.
2. BBB recommends for the selection of heads for
Public Sector Banks.
3. BBB helps the Public Sector Banks in developing
strategies and capital rising plans.
Select the correct answer using the code given below :
(a) 1 and 2 only
(c) 1 and 3 only
(b) 2 and 3 only
(d) 1, 2 and 3
I.A.S. (Pre) 2022 Ans. (d)
In a significant move to help the farmers of Uttar Pradesh,
the State Bank of India and NABARD have had jointly
established a 'Farmers Club' (Kishan club). The 'Club
aims at enhancing the bargaining power of the farmers and | artisans besides reaching out to the rural masses.
Economic & Social Development
Ans. (b)
See the explanation of above question.
121. Which of the following banks has started the 'Simply Click' credit card scheme?
(a) IDBI
General Studies
(b) ICICI
E-245
(c) B.O.B. (d) SBI
U.P.P.C.S. (Pre) 2016
Ans. (d)
On 15 September, 2015. State Bank of India in a strategic
partnership with 7 of India's biggest e-commerce companies
has started the 'Simply click' credit card scheme. These 7
e-commerce companies are Amazon India, BookMyShow,
Cleartrip, Fabfurnish, Food Panda, Lenskart and Ola Cabs.
122. Which bank became the first bank to open its branch
in China?
(a) IDBI Bank
(c) State Bank of India
Ans. (c)
(b) HDFC Bank
(d) Punjab National Bank
U.P.P.C.S. (Mains) 2007
U.P. U.D.A./L.D.A. (Pre) 2006
State Bank of India became the first Indian bank to open its
branch in China in 2006.
123. Which of the following Private Bank for the first time
did set up its branch in China?
(a) ICICI Bank
(c) Axis Bank
Ans. (c)
(b) HDFC Bank
(d) Samadhan Bank
U.P.P.C.S. (Mains) 2014
In January 2014,Axis Bank had opened a branch in Shanghai,
making it the first Indian private sector bank to accept deposits
in the Chinese mainland. The Shanghai branch was opened
four months after the Axis Bank received permission to start
banking operations from the China Banking Regulatory
Commission in September, 2013.
124. Which Indian commercial bank started the first ever
moving ATM Services?
(a) ICICI
(c) H.D.F.С.
Ans. (a)
(b) IDBI
(d) S.B.I.
U.P.R.O./A.R.O. (Pre) 2014
On 12 December, 2002, ICICI started the first ever moving
ATM services in Mumbai. ICICI is a private commercial bank.
125. Which private sector bank has launched 'e-Kisaan
Dhan' app for farmers?
(a) Axis Bank
(c) IDBI Bank
(e) None of the above / More than one of the above
Private sector HDFC Bank launched 'c-Kisaan Dhan' app
for farmers all over India in June, 2020. Through this app
the farmers will be able to access a bouquet of services.
both banking and agriculture, through their mobile phones.
e-Kisaan Dhan' app will provide value-added services like mandi prices, latest farming news, weather forecast,
information on seed varieties and more, Userscan also avail
multiple banking services through this app.
126. The Commercial Bank which has been merged with
the Punjab National Bank is :
(a) Bank of India
(b) New Bank of India
(c) Indian Overseas Bank
(d) Oriental Bank of Commerce
Ans. (b) & (d)
U.P. U.D.A./L.D.A. (Spl.) (Pre) 2010
New Bank of India was merged with Punjab National Bank
in 1993. On 30 August, 2019, Finance Minister Nirmala
Sitharaman announced that the Oriental Bank of Commerce
and United Bank of India would be merged with Punjab
National Bank and on 1 April, 2020 this merger came into
effect.
127. Recently The Bank of Rajasthan has been merged with:
(a) HDFC
(b) ICICI
(c) State Bank of Bikaner and Jaipur
(d) State Bank of India
Ans. (b)
R.A.S./R.T.S. (Pre) 2010
On 13 August 2010, Bank of Rajasthan was merged with
ICICI Bank Ltd.
128. Which of the following bank was closed due to
securities scam?
(a) Metropolitan Bank
(b) Bank of Karad
(c) National Housing Bank
(d) Grindlays Bank
Ans. (b)
M.P.P.C.S. (Pre) 1992
Bank of Karad was closed due to securities scam and merged
with Bank of India in 1994.
129. Which of the following institutions is involved in long-
(b) HDFC Bank
(d) Kotak Mahindra Bank
66th B.P.S.C. (Pre) 2020
Ans. (b) (a) ICICI
Economic & Social Development General Studies
term industrial financing?
(b) IDBI
E-246
(c) IFCI
Ans. (d)
Institution
ICICI
IDBI
IFCI
(d) All of the above
U.P. Lower Sub. (Pre) 1998
Established in (Month, Year)
January, 1955
July, 1964
July, 1948
All of the given institutions are involved in medium and
long-term industrial financing.
130. Match List-I with List-II and select the correct answer
from the codes given below.
As per the RBI's Scheme for setting up of wholly owned
subsidiaries (WOS) by foreign banks in India, the initial
minimum paid-up voting equity capital for a WOS shall be
Rs. 5 billion for new entrants. Existing branches of foreign
banks desiring to convert into WOS shall have aa minimum
net worth of Rs. 5 billion. Hence, statement I is incorrect
In the composition of the board of directors of WOS, it is
required that not less than fifty percent ofthe directors should
be Indian nationals/NRIs/PIOs subject to the condition that
not less than one-third of the directors are Indian nationals
resident in India. That means NRIs and PIOs can also fulfill
this fifty percent obligation. PIOs are not Indian nationals.
Hence, statement 2 is also incorrect.
132. Which one of the following four Foreign Banks
operating in India, has the largest number of branches
in the country?
(a) Citibank
(b) BNP Paribas Bank
(c) Standard Chartered Bank
List-I List-II
(Bank) (Type)
A. Indian Bank 1. Foreign
B. ICICI Bank 2. Cooperative
C. CITI Bank 3. Private
D. Saraswat Bank 4. Public
Codes
A B C D
(a) 1 2 3 4
(b) 2 3 1 4
(c) 4 2 3
Ans. (c) (d) 4 3 1 2
U.P. R.O./A.R.O. (Re-Exam) (Pre) 2016
Ans. (d)
(d) HSBC
U.P.P.C.S. (Pre) 2008
Jharkhand P.C.S. (Pre) 2003
Some major Foreign banks and their branches in India as on
15 November, 2025 are as follows :
The correctly matched lists are as follows :
Bank
Indian Bank
ICICI Bank
CITI Bank
Saraswat Bank
Name of Bank Country of
Incorporation
No. of Banking
branches Type
Public Standard Chartered
Bank
United Kingdom 100
Private
Foreign HSBC Ltd. |Hong Kong 27
Cooperative Deutsche Bank A.G. Germany 17
Citibank N.A. U.S.A. 14
BNP Paribas France 5
131. With reference to the rule/rules imposed by the Reserve
Bank of India while treating foreign banks, consider
the following statements:
1. There is no minimum capital requirement for
wholly owned banking subsidiaries in India.
2. For wholly owned banking subsidiaries in India, at
least 50% of the board members should be Indian
nationals.
Which of the statements given above is/are correct?
133. Consider the following pairs:
Large Bank
1. ABN Amro Bank
2. Barclays Bank
3. Kookmin Bank
Country of origin
: USA
UK
Japan
Which of the above pair(s) is/are correctly matched?
(a) 1 only (b) 2 only (a) 1 only (b) 2 only
(c) Both 1 and 2 (d) Neither 1 nor 2 (c) 1 and 2 (d) 2 and 3
I.A.S. (Pre) 2024 I.A.S. (Pre) 2009 Ans. (d) Ans. (b)
Economic & Social Development General Studies E-247
The correetly matched pairs are as follows
Large Bank
ABN Amro Bank
Barelays Bank
Kookmin Bank
So option (b) is the correct answer.
134. Consider the following:
1. Regional Rural Banks
3. NABARD
Country of Origin
Netherlands
United Kingdom
South Korea
2. Lead Bank Scheme
4. State Bank of India
The correct chronological sequence of establishment
C
of these banks are :
(a 4 3
(b) 2 1
3
2 3 4 1
(d) 2 4 3
U.P.P.C.S. (Mains) 2005
Ans. (b)
)ع)
Bank
136. The percentage of rural branches of all kinds of private,
public sector commercial Banks including Regional
Rural Banks as on 30.06.2012, according to RBI, was
approximately :
(a) 17%
(c) 37%
Ans. (c)
(b) 27%
(d) 47%
U.P.P.C.S. (Mains) 2012
As per RBI data, the percentage of rural branches of
all types of private and public sector commercial banks
including RRBs as on 30 June, 2012 was about 37%. As on
September, 2024, the total number of scheduled commercial
bank branches is 165501 in which number of rural branches
is 55372. Hence, as on September, 2024, the percentage of
rural branches of all kinds of scheduled commercial banks
including RRBs is about 33.5%.
137. The 'Lead Bank’ Scheme was launched in:
(a) October, 1966
(c) December, 1969
Year of Establishment
State Bank of India 1955
Lead Bank Scheme 1969
Ans. (c)
Regional Rural Banks 1975
NABARD 1982
(b) October, 1969
(d) December, 1980
U.P.P.C.S. (Spl.) (Mains) 2004
135. Consider the following statements:
1. The maximum limit of shareholding of Indian
promoters in private sector banks in India is 49
percent of the paid up capital.
2. Foreign Direct Investment upto 49 percent from all
sources is permitted in private sector banks in India
under the automatic route.
Which of these statements is/are correct?
(a) Only 1
(c) Both 1 and 2
Ans. (b)
(b) Only 2
(d) Neither 1 nor 2
I.A.S. (Pre) 2003
As per the RBI's licensing guidelines for new Private Sector
Banks in January 2001, the initial minimum required paidup capital for a new private bank was set at Rs. 200 crore,
which was required to be raised further to Rs. 300 within the
three years of commencement of business.The promoter's
contribution was required to be a minimum of 40 percent of
the paid-up capital of the bank. In February, 2002, the RBI
raised the FDI limit from 20% to 49% in private sector banks
from all sources. Hence as per the question period, Statement
l is incorrect and 2 is correct. At present, FDI limit in Private
Sector Banks is raised upto 74% (49% under the automatic
route and above 49% to 74% under the government route).
Economic & Social Development
The genesis of the Lead Bank Scheme (LBS) can be traced
to the Study Group headed by Prof. D.R. Gadgil (Gadgil
Study Group) on the Organizational Framework for the
Implementation of the Social Objectives, which submitted its
report in October, 1969. A Committee of Bankers on Branch
Expansion Programme of Public Sector Banks appointed by
the Reserve Bank of India under the Chairmanship of F.K.F.
Nariman (Nariman Committee) endorsed the idea of an 'Area
Approach' in its report (November, 1969), recommending
that in order to enable the Public Sector Banks to discharge
their social responsibilities, each bank should concentrate on
certain districts where it should act as a ‘Lead Bank'. Pursuant
to the above recommendations, the Lead Bank Scheme was
introduced by the Reserve Bank of India in December, 1969.
The Scheme aims at coordinating the activities of banks
and other developmental agencies through various fora in
order to achieve the objective of enhancing the flow of bank
finance to the priority sector and other sectors and to promote
banks' role in the overall development of the rural sector. For
coordinating the activities in the district, a particular bank is
assigned 'Lead Bank' responsibility ofthe district. The Lead
Bank is expected to assume a leadership role for coordinating
the efforts of the credit institutions and the Government. The
Lead Bank Scheme was last reviewed by the High Level
Committee headed by Smt. Usha Thorat, the then Deputy
Governor of the Reserve Bank of India in 2009.
General Studies E-248
138. L.B.S. is one of the economic measures taken by the
Government of India for financial inclusion. What is
L.B.S. in this context?
(a) Lead Banking Scheme (b) Loan Banking Scheme
(c) Lead Breaking System (d) Loan Banking System
Ans. (a)
See the explanation of above question.
U.P. P.C.S. (Pre) 2022
139. The functions of the Lead Bank are performed by :
(a) State Bank of India
(b) Reserve Bank of India
(c) Any Bank
(d) A bank designated for this purpose
U.P.P.C.S. (Mains) 2007
Ans. (d)
See the explanation of above question.
140. The basic aim of Lead Bank Scheme is that:
(a) big banks should try to open offices in each district
(b) there should be stiff competition among the various
nationalized banks
(c) individual banks should adopt particular districts for
intensive development
(d) all the banks should make intensive efforts to mobilize
deposits
Ans. (c)
I.A.S. (Pre) 2012
needs of bank credit of its service area. The primary objective
of SAA was to increase productive lending and forge effective
linkages between bank credit, production, productivity and
increase in income levels. The SAA scheme was reviewed
from time to time and appropriate changes were made in
the scheme to make it more effective.
The Service Area Approach scheme was last reviewed in
December, 2004 and it was decided to dispense with the
restrictive provisions of the scheme while retaining the
positive features of the SAA such as credit planning and
monitoring of the credit purveyance. Accordingly, under SAA
the allocation of villages among the rural and semi-urban
branches of banks were made not applicable for lending
except under Government Sponsored schemes. Thus, while
the commercial banks and RRBs are free to lend in any
rural and semi-urban area, the borrowers have the choice
of approaching any branch for their credit requirements.
Therefore, the requirement of obtaining ‘no due certificate'
from the service area branch for lending by non-service
area branch has been dispensed with. However, banks at
their discretion may take 5 steps considered necessary to
avoid multiple financing. As the restrictive provisions of
the service area have been removed in December 2004, the
Service Area Approach is applicable only for Government
Sponsored programmes.
142. District Credit Planning is done :
(a) Under the Lead bank
(b) Under the NABARD
(c) Under the District Magistrate
(d) Under the SBI
See the explanation of above question.
141. The Service Area Approach was implemented under
the purview of:
(a) Integrated Rural Development Programme
(b) Lead Bank Scheme
(c) Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment
Guarantee Scheme
(d) National Skill Development Mission
Ans. (b)
Ans. (a)
U.P. Lower Sub. (Pre) 2002, 2003
At district level, district credit planning is done under the
Lead bank.
143. Which of the following banks operates mainly in
relation to small industries?
(a) SIDBI
(c) ICICI
I.A.S. (Pre) 2019
Ans. (a)
The Service Area Approach (SAA) was implemented under
the purview of Lead Bank Scheme (LBS).The Service Area
Approach (SAA) introduced in April, 1989 for planned and
orderly development of rural and semi-urban areas was
applicable to all scheduled commercial banks including
Regional Rural Banks. Under SAA, each bank branch in rural
and semi-urban area was designated to serve an area of 15 to
25 villages and the branch was responsible for meeting the
Economic & Social Development
(b) IDBI
(d) NABARD
U.P.P.C.S. (Mains) 2012
Small Industries Development Bank of India (SIDBI), set
up on 2nd April, 1990 under an act of Indian Parliament,
acts as the principal financial institution for promotion,
financing and development of the Micro, Small and Medium
Enterprises (MSME) sector as well as for coordination of
functions of institution engaged in similar activities. SIDBI
is headquartered at Lucknow and having its offices all over
the country.
General Studies E-249
144. When was the Small Industries Development Bank of
India (SIDBI) established?
(a) April, 1990
(c) August, 1995
Ans. (a)
(b) January, 1950
(d) May, 2005
M.P. P.C.S. (Pre) 2023
See the explanation of above question.
145. The Head Office of Small Industries Development Bank
of India (SIDBI) is located at:
(a) Ghaziabad
(c) Kanpur
Ans. (b)
(b) Lucknow
(d) New Delhi
U.P. R.O./A.R.O. (Mains) 2016
U.P. R.O./A.R.O. (Mains) 2021
See the explanation of above question.
146. SIDBI has been established to:
(a) Finance cottage industries
(b) Finance small scale industries
(c) Finance large-scale industries
(d) Finance public sector undertakings
Ans. (b)
U.P.P.C.S. (Mains) 2004
See the explanation of above question.
147. Consider the following pairs:
(Name of the banks)
1. Allahabad Bank
2. Small Industries
Development Bank
of India
(Locations of Head Office)
- Kolkata
- Mumbai
3. Indian Overseas Bank - Chennai
Which one of the above pairs is not correctly matched?
(a) 1 only
(c) 3 Only
Ans. (b)
(b) 2 only
(d) 1 and 3 only
U.P. P.C.S. (Mains) 2014
Small Industries Development Bank of India (SIDBI) is headquartered at Lucknow. SIDBI is mandated to serve as
the principal financial institution for executing the triple agenda of promotion, financing and development of MSME
sector. Other pairs are correctly matched. Allahabad Bank
was merged with Indian Bank in 2020.
148. ‘Financial Inclusion' can be encouraged:
(a) by issuing a 'specific letter of credit' to the deserving beneficiaries.
(b) by providing banking services to people of lower
income group with 'zero' or 'minimum balance’.
Economic & Social Development
(c) bygroup. providing financial services to low income(d) by all of the above.
Ans. (d)
U.P.P.C.S. (Spl.) (Mains) 200financial services to individuals. It aims to include everybody'Financial Inclusion’ is a method of offering banking andin society by giving them basic financial services regardlessof their income or savings. It focuses on providing financialsolutions to the economically underprivileged. Hence, all ofthe given statements are correct and option (d) is the correctanswer.
149. Which one of the following is not the objective offinancial inclusion?
(a) To extend financial services to poor population.
(b) To unlock the door of growth potential of weakersection.
(c) Shrinking of banking infrastructure.
(d) To extend financial sector into rural areas.
Ans. (c)
U.P.P.C.S. (Pre) 2016Extending financial services to poor population, unlockingthe door of growth potential of weaker section of the society
and extending financial sector into rural areas are objectives
of financial inclusion. The objective of financial inclusionincludes expanding the banking infrastructure in underserved
areas. Hence, option (c) is the correct answer.
150. Which one of the following is a hindrance in the process of financial inclusion?
(a) low income
(b) illiteracy
(c) lack of banks' branches
(d) all of the above
Ans. (d) U.P. U.D.A./L.D.A. (Pre) 2013According to the C. Rangarajan Committee on FinancialInclusion, financial inclusion is the process of ensuring access to financial services and timely and adequate credit where needed by vulnerable groups such as weaker sections and low income groups at an affordable cost. Low income, illiteracythe
and

process
lack of banks' branches - all of these are hindrances in of financial inclusion.
151.Who among the following was the Chairman of the'Committee
January on Financial Inclusion' constituted in 2005?
(a) C. Rangarajan
General Studies
(b) D. Subbarao
E-250
labour workforce, low income households, small businesses.
other unorganized sector entities and other users, by
enabling high volume-low value transactions in deposits
and payments/remittance services in a secured technologydriven environment.
The existing non-bank Pre-paid Payment Instrument (PPI)
issuers authorized under the Payment and Settlement Systems
Act, 2007 (PSS Act); and other entities such as individuals/
professionals; Non-Banking Finance Companies (NBFCs).
corporate BCs, mobile telephone companies, super-market
chains, companies, real sector cooperatives; that are owned
and controlled by residents; and public sector entities may
apply to set up payments banks.
Payments Banks can issue ATM/Debit cards. They, however,
cannot issue credit cards. They cannot undertake lending
activities. Hence, option (b) is the correct answer.
156.RBI has cleared the resolution to start Payment Banks
in India for improving Financial Inclusion. Following
committee had recommended the creation of Payment
Banks :
(a) Arvind Mayaram
(c) Bimal Jalan
Ans. (d)
(b) Y.V. Reddy
(d) Nachiket Mor
U.P.P.C.S. (Mains) 2014
Nachiket Mor Committee on 'Comprehensive Financial
Services for Small Businesses and Low Income Households
had recommended the formation of a new category of banks
called Payment Banks. The Committee was formed on
23rd September, 2013. It submitted its report to the RBI on
7th January, 2014.
157. What is 'Shadow Banking'?
(a) Outsourcing of banking work by a bank
(b) Financial transactions and other activities of
non-banking financial intermediary
(c) Domestic banks' foreign operations
(d) Foreign bank operating in another country for banking and other activities
Ans. (b)
U.P.R.O./A.R.O. (Pre) 2014
'Shadow banking' in fact, symboizes one of the many failings
of the financial system leading up to the global financial crisis. The term ‘Shadow Bank' was coined by the American
economist Paul McCulley in 2007. ‘Shadow banking' refers
to the practice of banking-like activities (mainly lending) performed by non-banking financial intermediaries, which
are not subject to strict regulation. These institutions function
Economic & Social Development
as intermediaries between the investors and borrowers
providing credit and generating liquidity in the system
Although these entities do not accept traditional demand
deposits offered by banks, they do provides services similarto what commercial banks offer.
158. The difference between a bank and a Non-BankingFinancial Institution (NBFI) is that :
(a) abank interacts directly with customers while anNBFI
interacts with banks and governments
(b) a bank indulges in a number of activities relating to
finance with a range of customers, while an NBFI ismainly concerned with the term loan needs of largeenterprises
(c) a bank deals with both internal and internationalcustomers while an NBFI is mainly concerned withthe finances of foreign companies
(d) a bank's main interest is to help in business transactionsand savings/investment activities while an NBFI'smain interest is in the stabilization of the currency
Ans. (b)
I.A.S. (Pre) 1994
Banks are the financial institutions which are empowered
by the government to financial activities like to accept a
deposits or grant credit, to manage withdrawals, to pay interest, to clear cheques and to provide general services to the
clients. Banks also play an important role in socio-economic
development of a country. While a Non-Banking Financial
Institution (NBFI) is a financial institution that does not have
a full banking license and is not directly under the control of
the government. NBFI's are primarily concerned with the
term loan requirement of large companies.
159. With reference to the Non-Banking Financial
Companies (NBFCs) in India, consider the following
statements:
1. They cannot engage in the acquisition of securities
issued by the government.
2. They cannot accept demand deposits like SavingsAccount.
Which of the statements given above is / are correct
(a) l only
(b) 2 only
(c) Both 1 and 2
(d) Neither 1 nor 2
Ans. (b)
General Studies
I.A.S. (Pre) 2010E-252
A Non-Banking Financial Company (NBFC) is a company
registered under the Companies Act, 1956 engaged in the
business of loans and advances, acquisition of shares/stocks/
bonds debentures/securities issued by the Government or
local authority or other marketable securities of a like nature,
leasing, hire-purchase, insurance business, chit business but
does not include any institution whose principal business
is that of agriculture activity, industrial activity, purchase
or sale of any goods (other than securities) or providing
any services and sale/purchase/construction of immovable property. A non-banking institution which is a company
and has principal business of receiving deposits under any
scheme or arrangement in one lump sum or in installments
by way of contributions or in any other manner, is also a
non-banking financial company (Residuary non-banking
company). Hence, Statement 1 is incorrect. NBFC cannot
accept demand deposits, do not form part of the payment
and settlement system and cannot issue cheques drawn on
itself. Deposits insurance facility of Deposits Insurance and
Credit Guarantee Corporation is not available to depositers of
NBFCs, unlike in case of banks. Thus, Statement 2 is correct.
Hence, option (b) is the correct answer.
160. Consider the following statements:
1. In India, Non-Banking Financial Companies can
access the Liquidity Adjustment Facility window
of the Reserve Bank of India.
2. In India, Foreign Institutional Investors can hold
the Government Securities (G-Secs).
3. In India, Stock Exchanges can offer separate
trading platforms for debts.
Which of the statements given above is/are correct?
(a) 1 and 2 only
(c) 1. 2 and 3
Ans. (d)
(b) 3 only
(d) 2 and 3 only
price discovery and liquidity. In 2013, the National Stock
Exchange (NSE) launched the country's first dedicated debt
| trading platform. Hence, statement 3 is correct.
161. On which date, the Ombudsman Scheme for the
Non-Banking Financial Companies (NBFC), 2018 was
effectively introduced by Reserve Bank of India?
(a) 26 January, 2018
(b) 23 January, 2018
(c) 26 February, 2018
(d) 23 February, 2018
Ans. (d)
M.Р. Р.C.S. (Pre) 2020
The Ombudsman Scheme for Non-Banking Financial
Companies (NBFC), 2018, is an expeditious and cost free
apex level mechanism for resolution of complaints of the
customers of NBFCs, relating to certain services rendered
by NBFCs. The Scheme is being introduced under Section
45 L of the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934, with effect
from February 23, 2018. The NBFC Ombudsman is a senior
official appointed by the Reserve Bank of India.
162. Microfinance is the provision of financial services to
people of low-income groups. This includes both the
consumers and the self-employed. The service/services
rendered under microfinance is/are :
1. Credit facilities
2. Savings facilities
3. Insurance facilities
4. Fund Transfer facilities
Select the correct answer using the codes given below:
(a) 1 only
(c) 2 and 3 only
Ans. (d)
I.A.S. (Pre) 2024
Unlike banks, Non-Banking Financial Companies (NBFCs)
generally cannot borrow directly from the RBI's Liquidity
Adjustment Facility window and do not have large amounts
of government securities to offer as collateral. Hence,
statement 1 is incorrect.
Foreign Institutional Investors (and Foreign Portfolio
Investors) are allowed to invest in Government Securities
|(G-Secs) within certain limits set by the RBI and SEBI. Hence, statement 2 is correct.
In India, Stock Exchanges can offer separate trading
platforms for debts. These platforms provide a dedicated
[space for trading in debt instruments, which helps in better
Economic & Social Development
(b) 1 and 4 only
(d) 1, 2, 3 and 4
I.A.S. (Pre) 2011
Microfinance is the supply of basic financial services to
poor and low-income households and their micro-enterprises. Microfinance comprises several financial tools such as
savings, credit, leasing, insurance and cash transfers. These
services are provided by a variety of institutions, which
can be broadly divided into banks, NGOs, credit and savings corporatives and associations, and non-financial and informal sources.
163. RBI had set up a committee to study and give suggestions
on the microfinance sector. Its Chairman was :
(a) Y.H. Malegam
(c) Bimal Jalan
Ans. (a)
General Studies
(b) Abid Hussain
(d) Rakesh Mohan
U.P.P.C.S. (Mains) 2010
E-253
The Board of Directors of the RBI constituted a SubCommittee of the Board to study the issues and concerns on
the microfinance sector. The Sub-Committee of the Board
was formed on October 15, 2010, under the chairmanship of
Mr. Y.H. Malegam. The Committee submitted its report in
December, 2011.The Committee recommended that a seperate
category be created for NBFCs operating in the microfinance
sector, such NBFCs being designated as NBFC-MFI.
164. On which of the following recommendations,
Microfinance Institutions were set up in 2011?
(a) Malegam Committee
(b) Gaiporia Committee
(c) Rangrajan Committee
(d) Banking Reforms Committeе
Ans. (a)
the
U.P.R.O./A.R.O. (Pre) 2014
On the recommendations of Malegam Committee, a new
category of NBFCs, viz., Non Banking Financial Company
- Microfinance Institution (NBFC-MFI) was created.
165. 'Gullak Bachcha Bank' is a bank based in :
(a) Delhi
(c) Bhopal
(b) Patna
(d) Jaipur
(e) None of the above/More than one of the above
Ans. (b)
63rd B.P.S.C. (Pre) 2017
'Gullak Bachcha Bank' is a bank managed entirely by the
children at the Bal Bhavan-Kilkari in Patna. Opened on
Children's Day, November 14, 2009 by Bihar Chief Minister
Nitish Kumar, it was an experiment in thrift education. This
bank has four objectives- help children understand the
importance and correct use of money; develop the habit of
saving; promote understanding of the banking system; and
encourage the spirit of mutual cooperation.
166. Which among the following is an asset for a Commercial
Bank?
(a) Credit to farmers
(b) Deposits of public
(c) Borrowings from R.B.I.
(d) Demand deposits of Industries
Ans. (a)
U.P.P.C.S. (Mains) 2007
Among the given options, credit to farmers is an asset for a
commercial bank. Liabilities and assets of commercial banks
are as follows:
A. Liabilities
1. Paid-up capital and Reserves
2. Deposits:
(i) Time (Term) deposits
(ii) Demand deposits
Economic & Social Development
3. Borrowings
4. Other liabilities
B. Assets
1. Cash in hand and with RBІ
2. Money at call and short notice
3. Investments
4. Loans, advances, and bills discounted and purchased
167. Which of the following is not included in the assets of
a commercial bank in India?
(a) Advances
(b) Deposits
(c) Investments
(d) Money at call and short notice
Ans. (b)
I.A.S. (Pre) 2019
Among the given options, deposits are not included in the
assets of a commercial bank in India. Deposit is a liability
of the commercial bank, as it has to be returned to the
customer. Assets of a commercial bank in India include cash
in hand and balances with the RBI, money at call at short
notice, investments (government securities, other approved
securities and other securities), loans, advances and bills
discounted-or purchased etc. Liabilities of a commercial bank
in India include deposits (both term and demand deposits),
borrowings, paid-up capital, payable bills etc.
168. Which of the following is the most important component of the liabilities of commercial banks in India?
(a) Demand deposits
(b) Time deposits
(c) Inter-bank liabilities
(d) Other borrowings
Ans. (b)
U.P.P.C.S. (Mains) 2008, 2009
Time Deposits are the most important component of the
liabilities of commercial banks and after that Saving deposits
and Demands deposits are the important component of the
liabilities of commercial banks in India.
169. Non-performing assets in commercial banks mean:
(a) Bank deposits which are not invested
(b) Capital assets not in use
(c) Loans in which interest or principal amount is not
recovered
(d) Low-interest rate loans
Ans. (c)
General Studies
U.P.P.C.S. (Pre) 2009
E-254
A non-performing asset (NPA) refers to classification for
loans or advances that are in default or in arrears. A loan is
an arrears when its principal or interest payments are missed.
As per the RBI guidelines, any advance or loan is classified as
non-performing asset when its interest and/or installment of
principal remain overdue for a period of more than 90 days.
170. Priority sector lending by banks in India constitutes
the lending to :
(a) Agriculture
(b) Micro and small enterprises
(c) Weaker sections
(d) All of the above
Ans. (d)
I.A.S. (Pre) 2013
According to the priority sector lending norms of the RBI,
banks have to extend at least 40% oftheir credit to the priority
sector. Some of the priority sectors lending mentioned by the
RBI are agriculture, micro, small and medium enterprises,
education, housing, export credit, social infrastructure, renewable energy etc. Lending to weaker sections constitutes
a major part of this. Hence, option (d) is the correct answer.
171. Short Term Loans is of :
(a) Maximum 15 months
(c) 1 to 3 years
Ans. (a)
(b) 2 to 5 years
(d) 1 to 2 Months
R.A.S./R.T.S. (Pre) 1999, 2000
Loans are classified generally into three categories on the
basis of their duration:
Short-term loan Upto 1 year (or 15 months)
Medium-term loan Above 1 year (or 15 months) and
upto 3 years (or 5 years)
Long-term loan Above 3 years (or 5 years)
Note: However, sometimes, short-term loan provides for
upto 2 years. But it depends on different institutions.
172. Why is the offering of 'teaser loans’ by commercial
banks a cause of economic concern?
1. The teaser loans are considered to be an aspect of
sub-prime lending and banks may be exposed to
the risk of defaulters in future.
2. In India, the teaser loans are mostly given to
inexperienced entrepreneurs to set up manufacturing
or export units.
Which of the statement given above is/are correct?
(a) 1 only (b) 2 only
Economic & Social Development
(c) Both 1 and 2 (d) Neither 1 nor 2
I.A.S. (Pre) 2011
Ans. (a)
A teaser loan is nothing, but, a special loan that is offered
for a fixed duration and could then be withdrawn. It generally offers a low interest rate in the initial years or some
special offer and then gets back to the normal interest
rates. 'Teaser loans' are the unofficial term used to describe
housing loans that carry ultra-low fixed rate in initial years,
but charge market-linked rates thereafter. It is considered
to be an aspect of sub-prime lending and banks may be
exposed to the risk of defaulters in future. The Reserve Bank
of India had insisted that there be a higher provisioning for
such loans as they carry a higher risk of default. It is not given
to inexperienced enterpreneurs to set up manufacturing or
export units. Hence, option (a) is the correct answer.
173. Consider the following :
1. Market borrowing
2. Treasury bills
3. Special securities issued to RBI
Which of these is/are component(s) of internal debt?
(a) 1 only
(c) 2 only
Ans. (d)
(b) 1 and 2 only
(d) 1, 2 and 3
I.A.S. (Pre) 2001
Public debt is the total liabilities of the Central Government
contracted against the Consolidated Fund of India. It is oftwo
types- Internal debt and External debt. Internal debt is
categorized into marketable and non-marketable securities.
Marketable government securities include G-secs and T-bills
issued through auction. Non-marketable securities include
intermediate treasury bills issued to State Governments,
special securities issued to RBI among others. Hence, option (d) is the correct answer.
174. In the context of the Indian economy, non-financial
debt includes which of the following?
1. Housing loans owed by households
2. Amounts outstanding on credit cards
3. Treasury bills
Select the correct answer using the code given below:
(a) 1 only
(c) 3 only
Ans. (d)
(b) 1 and 2 only
(d) 1, 2 and 3
I.A.S. (Pre) 2020
Non-financial debt consists of credit instruments issued by
government entities, households and businesses that are not
covered in the financial sector. Hence, statement 1, 2 and 3
all are correct.
General Studies E-255
175. The term 'Core Banking Solutions' is sometimes seen
in the news. Which of the following statements best
describes/describe this term?
1. It is a networking of a bank's branches which
enables customers to operate their account from
any branch of the bank on its network regardless
of where they open their accounts.
2. It is an effort to increase RBI's control over commercial banks through computerization.
3. It is a detailed procedure by which a bank with huge
non-performing assets is taken over by another
bank.
Select the correct answer using the code given below.
(a) 1 only (b) 2 and 3 only
(c) 1 and 3 only
Ans. (a)
(d) 1,2 and
I.A.S. (Pre) 2016
Core banking is a banking service provided by a group of
networked bank branches where customers may access their
bank account and perform basic transactions from any of
the member branch offices. Banking software and network
technology allows a bank to centralize its record-keeping and
allow access from any location. Thus, statement 1 is correct
while statement 2 and 3 are incorrect. Hence, option (a) is
the correct answer.
176. The Government of India has recently acquired the
RBI's stake in :
(a) NABARD
(b) State Bank of India
(c) Housing Finance Corporation
(d) IDBI
Ans. (b)
U.P.P.C.S. (Mains) 2007
In June 2007, the Government of India had acquired the RBI's
|59.7% stake in State bank of India.
177. Which one of the following banks is under the control
of the Reserve Bank of India?
(a) Exim Bank
(c) NABARD
Ans. (*)
(b) IDBI
(d) Central Bank of India
U.P.P.C.S. (Pre) 1998
Rs. 1450 crore out of which 71.5 percent amountings
Rs. 1430 crore was divested in October, 2010 based on the
Government of India notification on September 16, 2010
The RBI divested its residual stake in NABARD and entare
stake in NHB amounting to Rs. 20 crore and Rs. 1450 crone
on February 26, 2019 and March 19, 2019 respectively With
this, the Government of India now holds 100% stake in bot
the financial institutions.
Divestment of RBI's stake in NABARD and NHB has it
basis in the recommendation of Narasımham Committee I
and the Discussion Paper prepared by RBI on Harmonizina
the Role and Operations of Development Financial
Institutions and Banks.
178. The National Housing Bank was set up in India asa
wholly-owned subsidiary of which one of the following
(a) State Bank of India
(b) Reserve Bank of India
(c) ICICI Bank
(d) Life Insurance Corporation of India
Ans. (b)
I.A.S. (Pre) 2007
The National Housing Bank (NHB) was set up on July 9
1988, as the apex institution for housing under the NHB Act
1987. It was fully owned subsidiary bank of the Reserve Bank
of India. On March 19, 2019 the RBI divested its entire stake
amounting to 1450 crore. With this, the Government of India
now holds 100% stake in NHB.
179. ‘Basel III Accord' or simply 'Basel III', often seen in
the news, seeks to :
(a) develop national strategies for the conservation and
sustainable use of biological diversity.
(b) improve banking sector's ability to deal with financial
and economic stress and improve risk management.
(c) reduce the greenhouse gas emissions but places a
heavier burden on developed countries.
(d) transfer technology from developed countries to
poor countries to enable them to replace the use of
chlorofluorocarbons in refrigerations with harmless
chemicals.
Ans. (b)
I.A.S. (Pre) 2015
The Basal Committee - initially named the Committee
on Banking Regulations and Supervisory Practices - was
established by the central bank Governors of the Group of
Ten countries at the end of 1974 in the aftermath of serious
disturbances in international currency and banking markets
(notably the failure of Bankhaus Herstatt in West Germany)
As per the question period, NABARD was under the control
of the Reserve Bank of India (RBI). Divestment of RBI's
shareholding in NABARD was done in two phases. The
Bank held 72.5 percent of equity in NABARD amounting to
General Studies Economic & Social Development E-256
The Committee, headquartered at the Bank for International
Settlements in Basel, was established to enhance financial stability by improving the quality of banking supervision
worldwide, and to serve as a forum for regular cooperation
between its member countries on banking supervisory matters. Since its inception, the Basel Committee has expanded its membership from the G10 to 45 members (Central banks and bank supervisors) from 28 jurisdictions. Starting
with the Basel Concordat, first issued in 1975 and revised
several times since, the Committee has established a series
of international standards for bank regulation, most notably
its landmark publications of the accords on capital adequacy
which are commonly known as Basel I (1988), Basel II (2004)
and most recently Basel III.
Basel III is an internationally agreed set of measures
developed by the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision
in response to the financial crisis of 2007-09. The measures aim to strengthen the regulation, supervision and risk
management of banks.
Like all Basel Committee standards, Basel III standards
are minimum requirements which apply to internationally
active banks. Members are committed by implementing and
applying standards in their jurisdictions within the time frame
established by the Committee.
The Basel III requirements were published by the Basel
Committee on Banking Supervision in 2010, and began to
be implemented in major countries in 2012. Implementation
of the Fundamental Review of the Trading Book (FRTB),
published and revised between 2013 and 2019, has been
completed only in some countries and is scheduled to be
completed in others in 2026. Implementation of the Basel
III: Finalising post-crisis reforms (also known as Basel 3.1),
introduced in 2017, was extended several times, and will be
phased-in by 2028.
180. Basel II relates to which one of the following?
(a) International standard for safety in civil aviation
(b) Measures against cyber crimes
(c) Measures against drug abuse by sportspersons
(d) International standards for measuring the adequacy
of a bank's capital
Ans. (d)
U.P.P.C.S. (Pre) 2005
In June 1999, the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision
issued a proposal for a new capital adequacy framework to
replace the 1988 Accord (Basel 1). This led to the release of
a revised capital framework in June 2004. Generally known
[as 'Basel II', the revised framework comprised three pillars :
L. minimum capital requirements, which sought to develop
and expand the standardized rules set out in the 1988
Accord;
2. supervisory review of an institution's capital adequacy
and internal assessment process:
3. effective use of disclosure as a lever to strengthen
market discipline and encourage sound banking
practices.
181. Consider the following statements :
1. Capital Adequacy Ratio (CAR) is the amount that
the banks have to maintain in the form of their own
funds to offset any loss that banks incur if the
account holder fail to repay any dues.
2. CAR is decided by each individual bank.
Which of the statements given above is/are correct?
(a) 1 only
(c) Both 1 and 2
Ans. (a)
(b) 2 only
(d) Neither 1 nor 2
I.A.S. (Pre) 2018
Capital Adequacy Ratio (CAR) is the ratio of a bank's capital
in relation to its risk weighted assets and current liabilities.
It is also known as the Capital to Risk-weighted Assets
Ratio (CRAR). The risk weighted assets take into account
credit risk, market risk and operational risk. It is decided by
central banks and bank regulators to prevent commercial
banks from taking excess leverage and becoming insolvent
in the process. The Basel III norms stipulated a capital to
risk-weighted assets of 8%. However, as per RBI norms,
Indian scheduled commercial banks are required to maintain
a CRAR of 9% (11.5% including capital conservation buffer)
on an ongoing basis.
182. With reference to Deposit Insurance and Credit
Guarantee Insurance Corporation, which of the
following statements is/are correct?
1. A subsidiary of Reserve Bank of India.
2. Deposit upto Rs. 5 lakh are insured by it.
Select the correct answer using the codes given below
Codes:
(a) Only 1
(c) Both 1 and 2
Ans. (c)
(b) Only 2
(d) Neither 1 nor 2
U.P. R.O./A.R.O. (Re-Exam) (Pre) 2016
Deposit Insurance and Credit Guarantee Corporation
(DICGC) is a wholly owned subsidiary of Reserve Bank of
India. It was established under the Deposit Insurance and
Credit Guarantee Corporation Act, 1961 for the purpose of
Economic& Social Development General Studies E-257
providing insurance of deposits and guaranteeing of credit
facilities. At present (from 4 February, 2020) DICGC insures
all bank deposits, such as saving, fixed, current, recurring
deposit for up to the limit of Rs. 5 lakh of each depositor in
a bank (earlier this limit was Rs. 1 lakh for each depositor).
183. In India, the interest rate on savings accounts in all the
Nationalized Commercial Banks is fixed by:
(a) Union Ministry of Finance
(b) Union Finance Commission
(c) Indian Bank's Association
(d) None of the above
Ans. (d)
I.A.S. (Pre) 2010
Earlier the interest rate on saving accounts in all the Nationalized Commercial Banks was fixed by the Reserve Bank
of India. But in October, 2011, the interest rate on saving
accounts have been deregulated by the RBI and now it is
fixed by commercial banks based on market interest rates.
184. What is / are the purpose / purposes of the 'Marginal
Cost of Funds Based Lending Rate' (MCLR) announced
by RBI?
1. These guidelines help improve the transparency in
the methodology followed by banks for determining
the interest rates on advances.
2. These guidelines help ensure availability of
bank credit at interest rates which are fair to the
borrowers as well as the banks.
Select the correct answer using the code given below :
(a) 1 only
(b) 2 only
(c) Both 1 and 2
(d) Neither 1 nor 2
Ans. (c)
I.A.S. (Pre) 2016
The 'Marginal Cost of Funds Based Lending Rate' (MCLR)
is an internal reference rate for banks fixed by the RBI. It
helps banks to define the minimum interest rate on different
types of loans. Now banks cannot lend below the MCLR. It
was implemented on April 1, 2016 by the RBI. MCLR came
into effect to fulfill the following objectives :
1. Improve transparency in the system utilized by banks to
fix interest rates on loans.
2. Ensure fairness in credit interest rates for both banks and
borrowers.
Economic & Social Development
3. It provides a competitive advantage to banks and boost their long-term value while contributing to the country's
is economic growth.
4. Enhance transmission of RBI's policy rates into the
country's banking system.
185. Consider the following statements related to Reserve
Bank of India (RBI) and choose the correct answer from the codes given below :
I. It is the apex bank.
II. It regulates the money supply.
III. It provides loan to business families.
IV. It monitors the work of NABARD.
Codes:
(a) I and II
(c) I, II and III
Ans. (d)
(b) II and IV
(d) I, II and IV
U.P. U.D.A./L.D.A. (Pre) 2001
The Reserve Bank of India (RBI) is India’s Central Bank.
also known as the bankers’ bank. RBI regulates the money
supply and monitors the works of NABARD. RBI does not
provide loan to any business families. Hence, option (d) is
the correct answer.
186. Consider the following statements regarding Reserve
Bank of India :
1. It is a banker to the Central Government.
2. It formulates and administers monetary policy.
3. It acts as an agent of the Government in respect of
India's membership of IMF.
4. It handles the borrowing programme of Government
of India.
Which of these statements are correct?
(a) 1 and 2
(c) 1, 2, 3 and 4
Ans. (c)
(b) 2,3 and 4
(d) 3 and 4
I.A.S. (Pre) 2001
The Reserve Bank of India (RBI) is the Central Bank of
India, which was established on April 1, 1935, under the RBI
Act. The main functions of the RBI are- Banker to banks:
Conducting and administration of monetary policy; Debt
and cash management for Central and State Governments;
Foreign exchange management (current and capital account
management); Regulation and supervision of the banking
and non-banking financial institutions including credit
information companies; Management of foreign exchange
reserves; Banker to the Central and State Governments;
Oversight of the payment and settlement system; Currency
management; Developmental role; and Research and
statistics. RBI acts as an agent of the Government in respect
of India's membership in IMF.
General Studies E-258
187. Which of the following is a function of Central Bank?
(a) Manage the Repo-rate
(b) Lending to Commercial Bank
(c) Bank facilities to Government
(d) All of the above
Ans. (d)
70th B.P.S.C. (Pre) (Re-Exam) 2024
See the explanation of above question.
188. Who is the Fiscal agent and advisor to Government in
monetary and financial matters?
(a) NABARD
(c) R.B.I.
Ans. (c)
(b) S.B.I.
(d) None of the above
U.P. R.O./A.R.O. (Mains) 2017
The Reserve Bank of India (RBI) is the fiscal agent and
advisor to Government in monetary and financial matters.
Since its inception, the RBI has undertaken the traditional
central banking function of managing the Government's
banking transactions. The RBI Act, 1934 requires the
Central Government to entrust the RBI with all its money,
remittance, exchange and banking transactions in India and
the management of its public debt. The Government also
deposits its cash balances with the RBI. The RBI also acts
as an advisor to Government, whenever called upon to do
so, on monetary and banking related matters.
189. Consider the following statements :
1. The Reserve Bank of India manages and services
Government of India Securities but not any State
Government Securities.
2. Treasury bills are issued by the Government of India
and there are no treasury bills issued by the State
Governments.
3. Treasury bills offer are issued at a discount from
the par value.
Which of the statements given above is/are correct?
(a) 1 and 2 only
(c) 2 and 3 only
Ans. (c)
(b) 3 only
(d) 1, 2 and 3
I.A.S. (Pre) 2018
A Government Security (G-Sec) is a tradable instrument
issued by the Central Government or the State Governments.
It acknowledges the Government's debt obligation. Such
securities are short term (usually called treasury bills, with
original maturities of less than one year) or long term (usually
called Government bonds or dated securities with original
maturity of one year or more). In India, the Central
Government issue both, treasury bills and bonds or dated
securities while the State Government issue only bonds or
dated securities, which are called the State Development
Loans (SDLs).
Treasury bills or T-bills are zero coupon security and pay no
interest. Instead, they are issued at a discount and redeemed
at the face value at maturity. For example, a 91 day T-bill
of Rs. 100 (face value) may be issued at Rs. 98.50, that is,
at a discount of Rs. 1.50 and would be redeemed at the face
value of Rs. 100.
In terms of Section 21A(1)(b) of the Reserve Bank of
India Act, 1934, the RBI may, by agreement with any State
Government undertake the management of the public debt of
that State. Accordingly, the RBI has entered into agreements
with all the State Governments (including UTs of Puducherry
and Jammu & Kashmir) for management oftheir public debt.
Thus, RBI manages and services the Central Government's
G-Secs as well as SDLs of these States.
From the above explanation it is clear that statements 2 and
3 are correct while statement 1 is incorrect.
190. Treasury bills are sold in India by :
(a) Reserve Bank of India
(b) State Governments
(c) Commercial Banks
(d) SEBI
Ans. (a)
U.P.P.C.S. (Mains) 2009
Treasury bills or T-bills, which are money market instruments, are short-term debt instruments issued by the Government of India. Treasury bills were first issued in 1917 in
India. Treasury bills are sold by the RBI on auction basis.
These are presently issued in three tenors, namely 91 day
T-bills, 182 day T-bills and 364 day T-bills.
191. With reference to India, consider the following statements:
1. Retail investors through demat account can invest
in 'Treasury Bills' and ‘Government of India Debt
Bonds' in primary market.
2. The 'Negotiated Dealing System-Order Matching'
is a government securities trading platform of the
Reserve Bank of India.
3. The 'Central Depository Services Ltd.' is jointly
promoted by the Reserve Bank of India and the
Bombay Stock Exchange.
Which of the statements given above is /are correct?
(a) 1 only
(c) 3 only
Ans. (b)
(b) 1 and 2
(d) 2 and 3
I.A.S. (Pre) 2021
Economic & Social Development General Studies E-259
Reserve Bank of India (RBI) launched 'Retail Direct Scheme
on November 12, 2021 for providing one-stop access to
facilitate investment in Government Securities (G-Secs) by
retail (individual) investors. It aims to promote retail participation in Government Securities by providing prices/quotes
to Retail Direct Gilt (RDG) account holders enabling them
to buy/sell securities under the RBI Retail Direct Schemе.
Hence, statement 1 is correct.
'Negotiated Dealing System – Order Matching' (NDS-OM) is
a screen-based electronic anonymous order matching system
for secondary market trading in Government securities owned
by RBI. Presently, the membership of the system is open to
entities like Banks, Primary Dealers, Insurance Companies,
Mutual Funds, etc. These are Primary Members (PM) of
NDS, permitted by RBI to become members of NDS-OM.
Gilt account holders which have gilt account with the PMS
are permitted to have indirect access to the NDS-OM system
i.e. they can request their Primary Members to place orders
on their behalf on the NDS-OM system. Hence, statement
2 is correct.
Central Depository Services Limited (CDSL) was founded
in 1999 to fulfil the goal of 'Convenient, Dependable and
Secured depository services at affordable cost to all market
participants'. CDSL was initially promoted by the Bombay
Stock Exchange (BSE) Ltd. which thereafter divested its
stake to leading commercial banks. It is not promoted by the
RBI. Hence, statement 3 is incorrect.
192. The Reserve Bank of India does not carries out the
transactions of which State Government?
(a) Nagaland
(c) Punjab
Ans. (*)
(b) Jammu & Kashmir
(d) Assam
U.P. R.O./A.R.O. (Pre) 2014
State Governments' transactions are carried out by RBI
in terms of the agreement entered into with the State
Governments in terms of Section 21A of the RBI Act, 1934.
As of now, such agreements exist between RBI and all the
State Governments (including UTs ofPuducherry and Jammu
& Kashmir), except Government of Sikkim. Thus, the legal
provisions vest Reserve Bank of India with both the right
and obligation to function a banker to all State Governments
(except Government of Sikkim). For Sikkim, RBI has limited
agreement for management of its public debt.
193. The Reserve Bank of India regulates the commercial
banks in matters of:
1. liquidity of assets
3. merger of banks
2. branch expansion
4. winding-up of banks
Select the correct answer using the codes given below(a) 1 and 4
(c) 1, 2 and 3
Ans. (d)
(b) 2, 3 and 4
(d) 1, 2, 3 and 4
I.A.S. (Pre) 2013RBI is the regulator of banks and possesses wide rangingpowers in this respect. It controls the liquidity through itsinstruments like Repo Rate, SLR, CRR etc. It controls branchexpansion by providing for among other things the ratio ofbank branches in rural and urban areas. It controls the mergersof banks along with the Competition Commission of India.
It also controls the winding-up of banks.
194. Which one of the following statements is not correct?(a) RBI is the Central Bank of the country.
(b) RBI is the banker of the Central and the StateGovernments.
(c) RBI is the custodian of the country's Foreign ExchangeReserve.
(d) RBI was established in 1949.
Ans. (d)
U.P.P.C.S. (Mains) 2011The Reserve Bank of India was established on April 1, 1935,
under the Reserve Bank of India Act of 1934. The central
office (headquarter) of the RBI was initially established in
Kolkata but was permanently shifted to Mumbai in 1937.
Though originally privately owned, since nationalization in
1949, the Reserve Bank is fully owned by the Government
of India.
Some of the basic functions of the RBI are :
1. Issuer of notes : The RBI is the only institution which has
the control over issuing of currency notes (except the one
rupee note, which is issued by the Ministry of Finance)
2. Banker to the Government : The RBI performs banking
functions for the Central and State Governments. It advises
the government on monetary policy issues and also
manages the government's public debt. Currently, the RBI
acts as banker to all the State Governments (including UTs
of Puducherry and Jammu & Kashmir), except Sikkim.For Sikkim, RBI has limited agreement for management
of its public debt.
3.
4.
Banker's bank : The Central Bank is also known as the
banker's bank because it performs functions similar te
what commercial banks do for their customers.
Credit regulation : The RBI regulates the flow of mone
in the country's financial system. RBI is responsible fo
maintaining price stability by controlling inflation It
controls inflation in the economy by controlling the credя
creation and takes necessary policy decisions from tim
to time to address systemic concerns.
Economic & Social Development General Studies E-260
6.
Foreign exchange reserves: The RBI maintains the
foreign exchange reserves in India. The Central Bank buys
and sells foreign currencies to keep the foreign exchange
rates stable. It takes necessary steps as andwhen required.
Role in development of the country: The RBI performs
various functions and takes necessary decisions to support
developmental agenda of the government.
195. In which year was the Reserve Bank nationalised?
(c) Indian Government (d) State Bank of India
U.P. U.D.A./L.D.A. (Spl.) (Mains) 2010
Ans. (b)
See the explanation of above question.
201. In India, the Central Bank's function as the ‘lender of
last resort' usually refers to which of the following?
(a) 1949
(c) 1969
Ans. (a)
See the explanation of above question.
(b) 1935
1. Lending to trade and industry bodies when they
fail to borrow from other sources.
(d) 1992 2. Providing liquidity to the banks having a temporary
crisis. M.P. P.C.S. (Pre) 2022 3. Lending to governments to finance budgetary deficits.
Select the correct answer using the code given below :
(a) 1 and 2 (b) 2 only
196. Where is the headquarters of RBI located? (c) 2 and 3
(b) Kolkata
Ans. (b) (d) Chennai
U.P.P.C.S. (Mains) 2010
(d) 3 only
I.A.S. (Pre) 2021 (a) Delhi
(c) Mumbai
Ans. (c)
See the explanation of above question.
197. When was the Reserve Bank of India was established ?
(a) 1920
(c) 1935
Ans. (c)
(b) 1930
(d) 1940
Uttarakhand P.C.S. (Pre) 2010
See the explanation of above question.
198. The Banker's Bank is :
(a) AXIS Bank
(c) State Bank of India
Ans. (d)
(b) NABARD
(d) Reserve Bank of India
U.P.P.S.C. (GIC) 2010
See the explanation of above question.
199.Who maintains the foreign exchange reserves in India?
(a) Reserve Bank of India
(b) State Bank of India
(c) Ministry of Finance, Government of India
(d) Export-Import Bank of India
Ans. (a)
See the explanation of above question.
U.P.P.C.S. (Pre) 2012
200. Which among the following controls the credit creation
by commercial banks in India? (a) Ministry of Finance (b) Reserve Bank of India
Economic& Social Development
As a banker to banks, the Reserve Bank of India acts as the
'lender of the last resort' (LoLR). It refers to the rescue of a
bank that is solvent but faces temporary liquidity problems
by supplying it with much needed liquidity when no one else
is willing to extend credit to that bank. Thus under LoLR, the
RBI provides emergency money or liquidity to the bank when
the latter faces financial stringency. In other words, LoLR
is a financial safety net provided by the RBI to commercial
banks. Hence, option (b) is the correct answer.
202. Which of the following statements is not correct
regarding the Reserve Bank of India?
(a) It issues all types of currency notes.
(b) It functions as a branch bank of the Government of
India.
(c) It is banker's bank.
(d) It exchanges foreign currency.
Ans. (a)
U.P.P.C.S. (Pre) 2007
The Reserve Bank of India does not issue one rupee notes and
coins, while currency notes of other denominations are issued
by the RBI. One rupee note was issued by the Government
of India bearing the signature of the Finance Secretary
while other notes bear the signature of RBI Governor. It
is noteworthy that Government of India continued to issue
currency notes till the Reserve Bank of India established on
1s April, 1935. When the one rupee note was reintroduced
as a war time measure in August 1940, it wasas issued by
Government of India with the status of a coin. Government
of India continued to issue one rupee note till 1994.
General Studies E-261
203. In Indian currency, the one rupee note is issued under
the signature of:
(a) Governor of Reserve Bank of India
(b) President of India
(c) Finance Secretary, Ministry of Finance, Govt. of India
(d) Finance Minister, Govt. of India
3. The RBI advises the commercial banks on monetary
matters.
Select the correct answer using the code given below
(a) 2 and 3
(c) l and 3
U.P. Lower Sub. (Spl.) (Pre) 2004
48th to 52nd B.P.S.C. (Pre) 2008
Uttarakhand P.C.S. (Pre) 2010
Ans. (d)
(b) 1 and 2
(d) 1, 2 and 3
I.A.S. (Pre) 2012
Ans. (c)
See the explanation of above question.
204. Which one of the following is not a function of Reserve
Bank of India ?
(a) Credit control
(b) As apex body of Scheduled Commercial Banks
(c) Formulation of monetary policy
(d) Credit creation
Ans. (d)
U.P.P.C.S. (Mains) 2008
Credit creation is the function of the commercial banks
and RBI controls the credit creation by its monetary policy.
Monetary policy is formulated by the Monetary Policy
Committee (MPC) of RBI constituted by the Central
Government and the RBI is vested with the reponsibility of
conducting monetary policy. Rest are the functions of the
Reserve Bank of India.
205. Which of the following is not a function of the Reserve
Bank of India?
(a) Regulation of currency
(b) Regulation of foreign trade
(c) Regulation of credit
(d) Custody and management of country's foreign
exchange reserves.
Ans. (b)
Uttarakhand P.C.S. (Pre) 2012
The main functions of the RBI are - (i) Issuer of currency
notes (ii) Banker to banks (iii) Banker to the government (iv)
Controller of credit (v) Exchange management and control.
Regulation of foreign trade is not the function of the Reserve
Bank of India. Foreign Trade is regulated by Ministry of
Commerce and Industry.
206. The Reserve Bank of India (RBI) acts as a bankers'
bank. This would imply which of the following?
1. Other banks retain their deposits with the RBI.
2. The RBI lends funds to the commercial banks in
times of need.
Economic & Social Development
The Reserve Bank of India (RBI) is the Central Bank of India
whose primary function is to manage and govern the financialsystem of the country. It is a statutory body established in
the year 1935 under the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934
The Central Bank regulates the issue and supply of the
Indian rupee. It also looks after the Central Government's
money. The Central Bank plays the role of the banker's bank
and regulates the banking sector. It advises the commercial
banks on monetary matters. In times of need, the RBI lends
funds to the commercial banks and commercial banks retain
their deposits with the RBI. It also plays an important role
in India's development story by supporting the government
in its developmental projects and policies.
207. Which of the following Banks is the Central Bank of
India?
(a) State Bank of India
(c) Union Bank of India
Ans. (d)
(b) Bank of India
(d) Reserve Bank of India
M.P.P.C.S. (Pre) 2012
See the explanation of above question.
208.Which of the following are the sources of income for
the Reserve Bank of India?
I. Buying and selling Government bonds
II. Buying and selling foreign currency
III. Pension fund management
IV. Lending to private companies
V. Printing and distributing currency notes
Select the correct answer using the code given below.
(a) I and II only
(c) I, III, IV and V
Ans. (a)
(b) II, III and IV
(d) I, II and V
I.A.S. (Pre) 2025RBI earns a major share of its income from interest on
Government of India securities and from profits earned by
their purchase and sale; therefore, Statement I is correct. RBI
also earns income from interest, discount, exchange gains,
and capital gains on foreign securities held as part of itsforeign exchange reserves, and gains from foreign exchange
transactions are also a major source of its income; therefore.
Statement II is correct.
General Studies E-262
Pension fund management, as described in Statement III.
is not included among RBI's authorized core functions and
income heads. Since the regulation of the National Pension
System lies with a separate Pension Fund Regulatory and
DevelopmentAuthority (PFRDA), pension fund management
cannot be treated as a source of RBI's income; therefore,
Statement III is incorrect.
Under Section 17 of the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934, RBI
can provide loans/advances only to governments, scheduled
banks, cooperative banks, etc., and not to private or nonbanking companies; hence, Statement IV is also incorrect.
Expenditure on note printing is a cost for the RBI, and it does
not earn income from the printing and distribution of currency
notes; therefore, Statement V is also incorrect.
Thus, only Statements I and II align with RBI's sources of
income, ne while Statements III, IV, and V are incorrect.
209. Monetary Policy is:
(a) Opposed to fiscal policу
(b) Complementary to fiscal policy
(c) More effective during depression
(d) Direct measure to control effective demand
Ans. (b)
U.P. R.O./A.R.O. (Mains) 2016
Monetary policy is complementary to fiscal policy. They
are interrelated and have to be judiciously combined to
promote and stabilize the economic activity. Monetary policy
influences the aggregate demand, and, in turn, output, income
and employment, indirectly by regulating the flow of credit
and money supply while fiscal policy has direct, through
lagged, impact on aggregate demand. Monetary policy is
more effective during inflation, while fiscal policy is more
effective during deflation.
210. What is the primary objective ofthe Monetary Policyу?
(a) Increase government spending
(b) Maintain price stability while ensuring economic
growth
(c) Reduce fiscal deficit
(d) Control foreign exchange reserves
Ans. (b)
M.P.P.C.S. (Pre) 2025
India's monetary policy primarily aims to maintain price
stability while keeping in mind the objective of ensuring
economic growth. Price stability involves controlling
infation,which preserves the currency's purchasing power and is lis considered a prerequisite for sustainable growth.The
Reserve Bank of India (RBI) pursues this by managing the
money supply and credit availability to support economic
development and create an environment for increased investment and job creation.
Economic & Social Development
211. Which one of the following is not an objective of
Monetary Policy?
(a) Price Stability
(b) Economic Stability
(c) Equitable Distribution of Income and Assets
(d) Foreign Exchange Rate Stability
Ans. (c)
U.P.P.C.S. (Mains) 2011
Equitable distribution of income and assets is not an
objective of monetary policy. Rest three are the objectives
of monetary policy.
212. Who formulates the monetary policy in India ?
(a) SEBI
(c) Finance Ministry
Ans. (b)
(b) RBI
(d) Planning Commission
U.P.P.C.S. (Pre) 2006
R.A.S./R.T.S. (Pre) 2010
The monetary policy in India was earlier (till 2016)
formulated by the Reserve Bank of India. At present, the
Monetary Policy Committee (MPC) of RBI constituted by
the Central Government determines the policy interest rate
required to achieve the inflation target. RBI's Monetary
Policy Department (MPD) assists the MPC in formulating
the monetary policy. The RBI is vested with the responsibility
of conducting monetary policy which is explicitly mandated
under the RBI Act, 1934. The primary objective of monetary
policy is to maintain price stability while keeping in mind
the objective of growth.
213. In India, which one of the following is responsible for
maintaining price stability by controlling inflation?
(a) Department of Consumer Affairs
(b) Expenditure Management Commission
(c) Financial Stability and Development Council
(d) Reserve Bank of India
Ans. (d)
See the explanation of above question.
I.A.S. (Pre) 2022
214. Which of the following statements is/are correct
regarding the Monetary Policy Committee (MPC)?
1. It decides the RBI’s benchmark interest rates.
2. It is a 12-member body including the Governor of
RBI and is reconstituted every year.
3. It functions under the chairmanship of the Union
Finance Minister.
Select the correct answer using the code given below:
(a) 1 only
General Studies
(b) 1 and 2 only
E-263
(c) 3 only (d) 2 and 3 only
1.A.S. (Pre) 2017
Ans. (a)
The Monetary Policy Committee (MPC) is responsible
for fixing the RBI's benchmark interest rates. The MPC
comprises six members three officials of the RBI including
the Governor of RB1 and three external members nominated
by the Government of India. External members will hold
office for a period of four years from the date of appointment
while other three members are official. The Governor of RBI
is the ex-officio chairperson of the Committee. Therefore
among the given statements, only statement 1 is correct.
215. In India ‘Money and Credit' is controlled by the :
(a) Central Bank of India
(b) Industrial Development Bank of India
(c) Reserve Bank of India
(d) State Bank of India
Ans. (c)
U.P.P.C.S. (Mains) 2010
In India, 'Money and Credit' is controlled by the Reserve
Bank of India (RBI). For this, the RBI uses qualitative and
quantitative measures.
216. Which one of the following is not an instrument of
selective credit control in India?
(a) Regulation of consumer credit
(b) Rationing of credit
(c) Margin requirements
(d) Variable reserve ratios
Ans. (d)
I.A.S. (Pre) 1995
Among the given options, the first three are the instruments of
selective credit control or qualitative credit control measures
of the RBI, while last one is an instrument of quantitative
credit control measures of the RBI.
Instruments of Monetary Policy Measures of RBI
Quantitative Credit
Control Measures
1. Bank Rate
2. Open Market Operations
3. Repo Rate
4. Reverse Repo Rate
5. Marginal Standing Facility
6. Variable Cash Reserve
Ratios (CRR and SLR)
Selective / Qualitative
Credit Control Measures
1. Loan Regulations by Fixation
of Margin Requirements
2. ConsumerCredit Regulations
3. Issue of Directives
4. Rationing of Credit
5. Moral Suasion and Publicity
6. Direct Action
217. Which of the following is not a measure of selectivecredit control?
(a) Change in lending margins
(b) Sale of government securities
(c) Credit rationing
(d) Moral suasion
Ans. (b)
R.A.S/R.T.S. (Pre) 2023See the explanation of above question.
218. Which one of the following is not the method ofquantitative credit control?
(a) Bank rate
(b) Variable reserve ratio
(c) Open market operation
(d) Rationing of credit
Ans. (d)
U.P.P.C.S. (Mains) 2017
See the explanation of above question.
219. Open market operations are included in :
(a) Qualitative techniques of credit control
(b) Quantitative techniques of credit control
(c) Fiscal policy control
(d) Labour policy control
Ans. (b)
U.P.P.C.S. (Mains) 2017
See the explanation of above question.
220. With reference to Indian economy, consider thefollowing:
1. Bank Rate
2. Open market operations
3. Public debt
4. Public revenue
Which of the above is / are component/components
of monetary policy?
(a) 1 only
(c) 1 and 2
Ans. (c)
(b) 2, 3 and 4
(d) 1, 3 and 4
I.A.S. (Pre) 2015
Bank Rate and open market operations OMOs are instrumens
of monetary policy while public debt and public revenue are
related to fiscal policy.
221. Open market operations of Reserve Bank of India reler
to:
(a) trading in securities
(b) auctioning of foreign exchange
Economic & Social Development General Studies E-264
(c) transaction in gold
(d) none of the above
Ans. (a)
U.P.P.C.S. (Pre) 201 U.P. Lower Sub. (Pre) 2008
The open market operations of the Reserve Bank of India
refer to the sale and purchase of government securities and treasury bills by RBI in the open market. The Central Bank
use this as primary tool of monetary policy. To increase money supply in the economy, the RBI purchases the
government securities and to decrease money supply in the
economy, the RBI sells government securities in the market.
122. In the context of Indian economy, ‘open market operations' refers to :
(a) borrowing by scheduled banks from the RBI
(b) lending by commercial banks to industry and trade
(c) purchase and sale of government securities by the RBI (d) None of the above.
Ans. (c)
See the explanation of above question.
I.A.S. (Pre) 2013
223. Variable reserve rates and open market operations are
the means of:
(a) State Finance Policy
(c) Budget Policy
Ans. (b)
(b) Monentary Policy
(d) Trade Policy
I.A.S. (Pre) 1993
The variable reserve rates and open market operations
(OMOs) are important tools of the Central Bank's (RBI)
monetary policy and play an essential role in regulating
money supply in the economy. Through variable reserve rates
RBI controls and regulates the credit flow, while, through
Open Market Operations, the RBI buys and sells government
securities, in order to regulate the supply of money. Both are
the RBI's quantitative measures under the monetary policy
[to regulate credit control.
224, Which one of the following activities of the Reserve
Bank of India is considered to be part of 'sterilization"?
(a) Conducting 'Open Market Operations
(b) Oversight of settlement and payment systems
(c) Debt and cash management for the Central and State
Governments
'Sterilization' refers to the process by which the RBI takes
away money from the banking system to neutralize the fresh
money that enters the system. To ease the threat of currency
appreciation or inflation, Central Banks often attempt what is
knwon as the 'sterilization' of capital flows. In a successful
sterilization operation, the domestic component of the
monetary base (bank reserves plus currency) is reduced to
offset the reserve inflow, at least temporarily. The classical
form of sterilization has been through the use of open market
operations, that is, selling Treasury bills and other instruments
to reduce the domestic component of the monetary base.
Hence, option (a) is the correct answer.
225. Given below are two statements, one labelled as
Assertion (A) and other as Reason (R).
Assertion (A) : Under Operation Twist, RBI
simultaneously sell short-term securities and buys
long- term securities.
Reason (R) : The main objective of this operation is to
promote long-term investment.
Choose the correct answer from the codes given below.
Codes:
(a) Both (A) and (R) are true and (R) is the correct
explanation of (A)
(b) Both (A) and (R) are true, but (R) is not the correct
explanation of (A)
(c) (A) is true, but (R) is false
(d) (A) is false, but (R) is true
Ans. (a)
U.P. R.O./A.R.O. (Pre) (Re-Exam) 2016
Simultaneous purchase and sale of government securities
by the RBI under open market operations (OMOs) is
popularly known as Operation Twist. It involves buying
long-term securities while selling short-term securities to
keep borrowing costs down. Operation Twist is a program of
quantitative easing used by the RBI that was first introduced
by the Federal Reserves in US in 1961. It is aimed at
stimulating economic growth through lowering long-term
interest rates. The main objective of this operation is to
promote long-term investments. Hence, both (A) and (R) are
true and (R) is the correct explanation of (A).
226. Which of the following measures would result in an
increase in the money supply in the economy?
1. Purchase of government securities from the public
by the Central Bank.
(d) Regulating the functions of Non-banking Financial
Institutions
I.A.S. (Pre) 2023 Ans. (a)
2. Deposit of currency in commercial banks by the
public.
Economic &
E-265 Social Development General Studies
3. Borrowing by the government from the (entral Bank.
4. Sale of government securities to the public by the
Central Bank
Select the correct answer using the codes given below:
(a) Only
(c) l and 3
Ans. (c)
(b) 2 and 4
(d) 2.3 and 4
L.A.S. (Pre) 2012
When the RBI wants to increase the money supply in the
economy, it purchases government securities (under OMOs)
from the market. Borrowing by the government from the
Central Bank is also a tool to increase the money supply in
the economy, while deposit of currency in commercial banks
by the public and sale of government securities to the public
by the Central Bank will reduce the money supply in the
economy. Hence, option (c) is the correct answer.
227. Consider the following measures that RBI uses to
control inflation in the economy.
1. Increase Bank Rate
2. Increase Cash Reserve Ratio
3. Increase Statutory Liquidity Ratio
4. Purchase of government securities
Select the correct answer from the codes given below:
(a) Only 1 and 2
(c) Only 2, 3 and 4
Ans. (b)
(b) Only 1, 2 and 3
(d) Only 1, 3 and 4
U.P. R.O.JA.R.O. (Pre) (Re-Exam) 2016
The steps generally taken by the RBI to tackle inflation
include a rise in Bank Rate and Repo Rate (the rates at which
banks borrow from the RBI), a rise in Cash Reserve Ratio
(CRR) and/or Statutory Liquidity Ratio (SLR), a reduction
in rate of interest on cash deposited by banks with RBI and
selling of government securities. These steps have been taken
as monetary instruments by the RBI to control the credit
creation and reduce the money supply in the economy in order
to tackle the inflation. Purchase of government securities will
increase the money supply in the economy.
228. With reference to the Indian economy, consider the
following statements :
1. If the inflation is too high, Reserve Bank of India
(RBI) is likely to buy government securities.
2. If the rupee is rapidly depreciating, RBI is likely to
sell dollars in the market.
Which of the statements given above are correct?
(a) I and 2 only
(c) land 3 only
Ans. (b)
(b) 2 and 3 only
(d) 1.2 and 3
LA.S. (Pre) 20022Reserve Bank of India (RBI) periodically intervenes in thee
debt market to influence the interest rates and rate of inflatin
in the economy. If RBI feels inflation is too high. it wll
government securities, and suck money out of the system
On the other hand, if RBI feels the economy is heading
wards a recession, it will buy government securities from
banks, and inject money into the system. Hence, statemen
is incorrect
RBI also intervenes periodically in foreign exchange mark
If the rupee is rapidly depreciating, RBI will sell dollars n
the market. This will increase the supply of dollars and the
demand for rupees, causing the rupee price of the dollar
come down. On the contrary, if the rupee is rapidly apprecта
ing, RBI will buy dollars and inject rupees into the econcmy
Hence, statement 2 is correct
Interest rate movements in a foreign economy can alse
stimulate action on the part of RBI. If interest rates in the
USA or the EU were to fall, FIIs will ramp up investments
in India. The resultant demand for rupees will cause the
pee to appreciate. Then, that is likely to induce RBI to b
dollars and inject rupees into the system. Hence, statemen
3 is also correct.
229. In the context of Indian economy, which of the
following is/are the purpose / purposes of 'Statutar
Reserve Requirements'?
1. To enable the Central Bank to control the amou
of advances the banks can create.
2. To make the people's deposits with banks safe and
liquid.
3. To prevent commercial banks from making excesstv
profits.
4. To force the banks to have sufficient vault cash
meet their day-to-day requirements.
Select the correct answer using the code given bele
(a) 1 only
(c) 2 and 3 only
Ans. (a)
(b) 1 and 2 only
(d) 1, 2, 3 and 4
I.A.S. (Pre) 20
'Statutory Reserve Requirements' (SRR) is a munumm
percentage of deposits that a commercial bank has to maita
in the form of liquid cash, gold or other securities. I
basically the reserve requirements that banks are expected
to keep before offering credit to customers. The SRR is fixed
3. If interest rates in the USA or European Union were
to fall, that is likely to induce RBI to buy dollars.
Economic & Social Development General Studies E-266
3. Borrowing by the government from the Central Bank.
4. Sale of government securities to the public by the
Central Bank.
Select the correct answer using the codes given below:
(a) Only 1
(c) 1 and 3
Ans. (c)
(b) 2 and 4
(d) 2, 3 and 4
I.A.S. (Pre) 2012
When the RBI wants to increase the money supply in the
economy, it purchases government securities (under OMOs)
from the market. Borrowing by the government from the
Central Bank is also a tool to increase the money supply in
the economy, while deposit of currency in commercial banks
by the public and sale of government securities to the public
by the Central Bank will reduce the money supply in the
economy. Hence, option (c) is the correct answer.
227. Consider the following measures that RBI uses to
control inflation in the economy.
1. Increase Bank Rate
2. Increase Cash Reserve Ratio
3. Increase Statutory Liquidity Ratio
4. Purchase of government securities
Select the correct answer from the codes given below :
(a) Only 1 and 2
(c) Only 2, 3 and 4
Ans. (b)
(b) Only 1, 2 and 3
(d) Only 1, 3 and 4
U.P. R.O./A.R.O. (Pre) (Re-Exam) 2016
The steps generally taken by the RBI to tackle inflation
include a rise in Bank Rate and Repo Rate (the rates at which
banks borrow from the RBI), a rise in Cash Reserve Ratio
(CRR) and/or Statutory Liquidity Ratio (SLR), a reduction
in rate of interest on cash deposited by banks with RBI and
selling of government securities. These steps have been taken
as monetary instruments by the RBI to control the credit
creation and reduce the money supply in the economy in order
to tackle the inflation. Purchase of government securities will
increase the money supply in the economy.
228. With reference to the Indian economy, consider the
following statements :
1. If the inflation is too high, Reserve Bank of India
(RBI) is likely to buy government securities.
Which of the statements given above are correct?
(a) 1 and 2 only
(c) 1 and 3 only
Ans. (b)
(b) 2 and 3 only
(d) 1, 2 and 3
I.A.S. (Pre) 2022Reserve Bank of India (RBI) periodically intervenes in the
debt market to influence the interest rates and rate of inflationin the economy. If RBI feels inflation is too high, it will sell
government securities, and suck money out of the system
On the other hand, if RBI feels the economy is heading towards a recession, it will buy government securities from the
banks, and inject money into the system. Hence, staterment
1 is incorrect.
RBI also intervenes periodically in foreign exchange markets.
If the rupee is rapidly depreciating, RBI will sell dollars in
the market. This will increase the supply of dollars and the
demand for rupees, causing the rupee price of the dollar to
come down. On the contrary, if the rupee is rapidly appreciating, RBI will buy dollars and inject rupees into the economy.
Hence, statement 2 is correct.
Interest rate movements in a foreign economy can also
stimulate action on the part of RBI. If interest rates in the
USA or the EU were to fall, FIIs will ramp up investments
in India. The resultant demand for rupees will cause the rupee to appreciate. Then, that is likely to induce RBI to buy
dollars and inject rupees into the system. Hence, staterment
3 is also correct.
229. In the context of Indian economy, which of the
following is/are the purpose / purposes of 'StatutaryReserve Requirements'?
1. To enable the Central Bank to control the amount
of advances the banks can create.
2. To make the people's deposits with banks safe andliquid.
3. To prevent commercial banks from making excessiveprofits.
4. To force the banks to have sufficient vault cash to
meet their day-to-day requirements.
Select the correct answer using the code given below
(a) 1 only
(c) 2 and 3 only
:
(b) 1 and 2 only
(d) 1, 2, 3 and 4
I.A.S. (Pre) 2014Ans. (a)
3. If interest rates in the USA or European Union were
to fall, that is likely to induce RBI to buy dollars.
'Statutory Reserve Requirements' (SRR) is a minimum
percentage of deposits that a commercial bank has to maintain
in the form of liquid cash, gold or other securities. It is
basically the reserve requirements that banks are expected
to keep before offering credit to customers.The SRR is fixed
Economic & Social Development General Studies E-266
2. If the rupee is rapidly depreciating, RBI is likely to
sell dollars in the market.
hy the Central Bank. SRR is the traditional tool of the Central
Bank's monetary policy to control credit growth. Other
statements are not among the purposes of the SRR. Hence.
option (a) is the correct answer.
230. Which of the following terms indicates a mechanism
used by commercial banks for providing credit to the
government?
(a) Cash Credit Ratio
(b) Debt Service Obligation
(c) Liquidity Adjustment Facility
(d) Statutory Liquidity Ratio
Ans. (d
I.A.S. (Pre) 2010
Statutory Liquidity Ratio or SLR is a minimum percentage of
deposits that a commercial bank has to maintain in the form of
liquid cash, gold or other securities. It is basically the reserve
requirement that banks are expected to keep before offering
credit to customers. These are not reserved with the Reserve
Bank of India (RBI), but with banks themselves. The SLR is
fixed by the RBI. CRR (Cash Reserve Ratio) and SLR have
been the traditional tools of the Central Bank's monetary
policy to control credit growth, flow of liquidity and inflation
in the economy. The SLR was prescribed by Section 24 (2A)
of Banking Regulation Act, 1949.
The government uses the SLR to regulate inflation and
liquidity. Increasing the SLR will control inflation in the economy while decreasing it will cause growth in the economy.
Although, the SLR is a monetary policy instrument of RBI, it
is important for the government to make its debt management
programme successful. SLR has helped the government to
sell its securities or debt instruments to banks. Most of the
banks will be keeping their SLR in the form of government
securities as it will earn them an interest income.
Cash Reserve Ratio is the percentage of the deposit
(NDTL: Net Demand and Time Liabilities) that a bank has
to keep with the RBI. CRR is kept in the form of cash and
that also with the RBI. No interest is paid on such reserves.
On the other hand, SLR is the percentage of deposit that the
banks have to keep as liquid assets in their own vault.
The CRR is a more active and useful monetary policy tool
compared to the SLR. Usually, the RBI changes CRR to
manage liquidity in the economy.
231. When the Reserve Bank of India reduces the Statutory
Liquidity Ratio by 50 basis points, which of the
following is likely to happen?
(a) India's GDP growth rate increases drastically
(b) Foreign Institutional Investors may bring more capital
into our country.
(c) Scheduled Commercial banks may cut their lending
rates.
(d) It may drastically reduce the liquidity to the banking
system.
Ans. (c)
I.A.S. (Pre) 2015
Statutory Liquidity Ratio (SLR) is a minimum percentage of
deposits that a commercial bank has to maintain in the form of
liquid cash, gold or other securities. It is basically the reserve
requirement that banks are expected to keep before offering
credit to customers. If the RBI reduces the SLR by 50 basis
points, then commercial banks have more liquid cash to offer
credit to customers. In this situation, commercial banks may
cut their lending rates to promote credit creation.
232. The banks are required to maintain a certain ratio
between their cash in hand and total assets. This is called:
(a) SBR (Statutory Bank Ratio)
(b) SLR (Statutory Liquid Ratio)
(c) CBR (Central Bank Reserve)
(d) CLR (Central Liquid Reserve)
Ans. (b)
U.P.P.C.S. (Mains) 2007
I.A.S. (Pre) 1998
See the explanation of above question.
233. Which of the following is not determined by Reserve
bank of India ?
(a) Bank rate
(c) P.L.R.
Ans. (c)
(b) C.R.R.
(d) S.L.R.
U.P.P.C.S. (Spl.) (Mains) 2008
P.L.R. is not determined by the Reserve Bank of India.
The Prime Lending Rate (P.L.R.) is the interest rate that
commercial banks charge to their most creditworthy
corporate customers.
234. The terms 'Marginal Standing Facility Rate' and 'Net
Demand and Time Liabilities', sometimes appearing
in news, are used in relation to :
(a) banking operations
(b) communication networking
(c) military strategies
(d) supply and demand of agricultural products
Ans. (a)
I.A.S. (Pre) 2014
'Marginal Standing Facility' (MSF) is a facility under which
scheduled commercial banks can borrow additional amount
of overnight money from the RBI by dipping into their
Statutory Liquidity Ratio (SLR) portfolio up to a limit at a
Economic & Social Development General Studies E-267
penal rate of interest. This provides a safety valve against
unanticipated liquidity shocks to the banking system. MSF
rate is an instrument used for implementing monetary policy.
It is noteworthy that Bank Rate has been aligned to the MSF
rate and, therefore, changes automatically as and when the
MSF rate changes alongside policy repo rate changes.
Net Demand and Time Liabilities' (NDTL) refers to the
total demand and time liabilities (deposits) of the public that
are held by the banks with other banks. NDTL shows the
difference between the sum of demand and time liabilities
(deposits) of a bank (with the public or the other bank) and
the deposits in the form of assets held by the other bank.
235. If the RBI decides to adopt an expansionist monetary
policy, which of the following would it not do?
1. Cut and optimize the Statutory Liquidity Ratio
2. Increase the Marginal Standing Facility Rate
3. Cut the Bank Rate and Repo Rate
Select the correct answer using the code given below :
(a) 1 and 2 only
(c) 1 and 3 only
Ans. (b)
(b) 2 only
(d) 1, 2 and 3
I.A.S. (Pre) 2020
Statutory Liquidity Ratio (SLR) is a minimum percentage
of deposits that a commercial bank has to maintain in the
form of liquid cash, gold or other securities before offering
credit to customers. RBI increases the SLR to reduce credit
growth during the time of inflation and cut and optimize the
SLR during the period of recession to increase credit. Hence,
statement 1 is incorrect.
Marginal Standing Facility (MSF) Rate is a window for
commercial banks to borrow funds overnight from the RBI
against approved government securities. Increasing the MSF
will make borrowing costly, which is against the expansionist
monetary policy of the RBI. Hence, statement 2 is correct.
RBI cuts the Bank Rate and Repo Rate to increase the
liquidity in the market. It comes under the RBI's expansionist
monetary policy. Hence, statement 3 is incorrect.
236. If the interest rate is decreased in an economy, it will :
(a) decrease the consumption expenditure in the economy
(b) increase the tax collection of the Government
(c) increase the investment expenditure in the economy
(d) increase the total savings in the economy
Ans. (c)
I.A.S. (Pre) 2014
If the interest rate is decreased in an economy, it will
increase consumption and investment expenditure in the
economy, because at low interest rate borrowing becomes
easy and people tend towards investment and consumption
expenditure. Hence, option (c) is the correct answer.
237. Financial sector reforms in India consist of:
(a) Lowering down of CRR and SLR
(b) Entry of private firms in insurance sector
(c) Deregulation of interest rates
(d) All of the above
Ans. (d)
56th to 59th B.P.S.C. (Pre)2015
The financial sector reforms refer to steps taken by theGovernment to reform the banking system, capital marketgovernment debt market, foreign exchange market ete. Thefinancial sector reforms in India mainly consist of:
• Lowering down of CRR and SLR;
Deregulation of deposit and lending interest rates;
Entry of private firms in banking and insurance sector:.Reforms related to non-performing assets (NPA);
Elimination of direct or selective credit controls.
Hence, option (d) is the correct answer.
238. Since the economic reforms were launched in Indiwhich one of the following statements is true for Stat.utory Liquidity Ratio (SLR) and Cash Reserve Ratin(CRR) of the commercial banks:
(a) Both SLR and CRR have been raised
(b) SLR has been reduced but CRR has been raised
(c) SLR has been raised but CRR has been reduced
(d) Both SLR and CRR have been reduced
Ans. (d)
U.P.P.C.S. (Pre) 1999Accepting the recommendations of Narsimham Committee,RBI had reduced the SLR from 38.5% in 1991 to 25% in1997. At present (effective January 23, 2007), the maximumlimit of SLR is 40% while minimum limit is 0%. CRR wasalso changed with time. In May, 1996 CRR was at 13% andthere was a tendency to decrease in it overtime. In November.| 1999, CRR was reduced to 9%. As on 5 June, 2026, CRR isat 3.00% and SLR is at 18.00%. It is to be noted that in June.2025 MPC meeting, it has been decided to reduce the CRR(then at 4.00%) by 100 basis points (bps) to 3.00% in fourequal tranches of 25 bps each with effects from fortnightsbeginning 6 September, 4 October, 1 November and 29November, 2025.
239. What was the lower ceiling of Statutory Liquidity Ratio(SLR) which was amended in 2007 by the Governmentof India?
(a) 24%
Economic & Social Development General Studies
(b) 25%
E-268
(c) 27%
(d) 30%
M.P.P.C.S. (Pre) 2024
Ans. (b)
In 2007, the Banking Regulation Act of 1949 was amended
to remove the lower ceiling of the Statutory Liquidity Ratio
(SLR). Prior to this amendment, the SLR was stipulated to
be no lower than 25% of a bank's Net Demand and Time
Liabilities (NDTL). The amendment allowed the Reserve
Bank ofIndia (RBI) to set the SLR at any level between 0%
and 40% ofa bank's NDTL, giving the RBI greater flexibility
in monetary policy management. At present (as on 5 June
2026) SLR is at 18%.
240. The mandatory proportion of the total deposits and
reserves of the commercial banks deposited with the
Reserve Bank of India is called:
(a) Balance of payment
(c) Caution Money
Ans. (d)
(b) Bank Guarantee
(d) Cash Reserve Ratio
Chhattisgarh P.C.S. (Pre) 2008
U.P.P.C.S. (Mains) 2013
The Reserve Bank of India (RBI) mandates the commercial
banks to store a proportion of their deposits in the form of
cash so that the same can be given to the bank's customers if
the need arises. The percentage of cash required to be kept in
reserves, vis-a-vis a bank's total deposits, is called the Cash
Reserve Ratio (CRR). By definition, CRR is the average daily
balance that a bank is required to maintain with the Reserve
Bank as a share of such percent of its NDTL (Net Demand
and Time Liabilities) that the Reserve Bank may notify from
time to time. The cash reserve is either stored in the bank's
vault or is sent to the RBI.
241. The ratio of total deposits that a Commercial Banks
must keep with Reserve Bank of India is called:
(a) Legal Reserve Ratio (b) Statutory Liquidity Ratio
(c) Cash Reserve Ratio (d) Deposit Ratio
Ans. (c)
70th B.P.S.C. (Pre) (Re-Exam) 2024
See the explanation of above question.
242. An increase in CRR by the Reserve Bank Of India
results in:
(a) decrease in debt of the government
(b) reduction in liquidity in the economy
The Reserve Bank of India mandates the commercial banks
to hold a certain minimum amount of deposits as reserves
with the RBI. The percentage of cash required to be kept in
reserves as against the bank 's total deposits (NDTL), is called
| Cash Reserve Ratio (CRR). A higher CRR means there is less
availability of loanable funds, in turn it reduces the supply
of money (liquidity) in the economy
243. Lowering the Cash Reserve Ratio, it will have the
following impact on the economy:
I. Banks will have higher leverage to liquidity.
II. The economy may see increased investment.
III. Supply of currency in the economy may broaden.
IV. Real investment rate may decline.
Select the correct code :
(a) I only
(c) I, II, III and IV
(b) Both I and II
(d) II, III and IV
(e) None of the above / More than one of the above
66th B.P.S.C. (Pre) (Re-Exam) 2020
Ans. (e)
Cash Reserve Ratio (CRR) is described as a particular
percentage of cash deposits that must be maintained by
every bank in India as per the requirements of the RBI. If
RBI lowers the CRR, the banks will have higher leverage to
liquidity because it increases the loanable funds with the bank.
The banks in turn can sanction further loans to businesses and
industry for different investment purposes and the economy
may see increased investment. It also increases the overall
supply of money in the economy. Hence, Statement I, II and
III are correct while statement IV is incorrect.
244. If the Cash Reserve Ratio is lowered by the RBI, it's
impact on credit creation will be :
(a) Increase
(c) No impact
Ans. (a)
(b) Decrease
(d) None of the above
48th to 52nd B.P.S.C. (Pre) 2008
See the explanation of above question.
245. When the Reserve Bank of India announces an increase
of the Cash Reserve Ratio, what does it mean?
(a) The commercial banks will have less money to lend
(b) The Reserve Bank of India will have less money to
lend
(c) The Union Government will have less money to lend
(d) The commercial banks will have more money to lend
(c) attracting more FDI in the country (d) more flow of credit to desired sectors
U.P.P.C.S. (Pre) 2010 Ans. (b) Ans. (a)
Economic & Social Development General Studies
I.A.S. (Pre) 2010
E-269
Increase in CRR means that the banks have to deposit more
with the RBI and will have less money to lend to the borrowers. Through this act, RBI tries to reduce the moncy supply
and control the inflation
246. When RBI announced an increase in Cash Reserve
Ratio (CRR) then what does it mean?
(a) The Union Government will have less money to lend
(b) The RBI will have less money to lend
(c) The commercial bank will have less money to lend
(d) All of the above
(e) None of these
Ans. (c)
Chhattisgarh P.C.S. (Pre) 2017
See the explanation of above question.
247. Which one of the following statements is correct
regarding increase in the Cash Reserve Ratio in India?
(a) It increases credit creation
(b) It reduces credit creation
(c) It does not affect credit
(d) It denotes liberal monetary policy
U.P.P.C.S. (Mains) 2004
Ans. (b)
See the explanation of above question.
248. Repo Rate comes under purview of:
(a) Monetary Policy
(c) Labour Policy
Ans. (a)
(b) Fiscal Policy
(d) Population Policy
U.P.P.C.S. (Mains) 2017
Repo (Repurchase Option) Rate is the key monetary policy
rate of interest at which the Central Bank or the Reserve Bank
of India (RBI) lends short term money to banks, essentially to
control credit availability, inflation, and the economic growth.
Repo Rate in India is the primary tool in the RBI's Monetary
and Credit Policy. Other policy rates, such as Reverse Repo
Rate and Marginal Standing Facility Rate, are often directly
linked with the Repo Rate of RBI. Reverse Repo Rate is, on
the other hand, an exact opposite of the Repo Rate. Banks
park money with the RBI for short term at the prevailing
Reverse Repo Rate.
249. 'Repurchase Option' is used :
(a) to reduce the heavy sell off pressure of rupee in
Exchange market.
(b) to increase the sell off pressure of rupee in Exchange
market.
(c) to reduce the value of rupee in Exchange market
(d) None of the above
Ans. (d)
U.P. Lower Sub. (Pre) 199g
'Repurchase Option' (or Repo Rate) is used by the Reserve
Bank of India (RBI) to regulate the money supply and inflation
in the economy. Hence, option (d) is the correct answer
250. Which among the following regulates the Repo rate
(a) Reserve Bank of India
(b) General Insurance Corporation
(c) Export-Import Bank
(d) Mutual Funds
Ans. (a)
U.P.P.C.S. (Mains) 2002
See the explanation of above question.
251. The interest rate at which the Reserve Bank of India
lends to Commercial banks in the short term to
maintain liquidity is known as :
(a) Interest Rate
(c) Bank Rate
Ans. (d)
(b) Reverse Repo Rate
(d) Repo Rate
U.P.P.C.S. (Mains) 2008
U.P.P.C.S. (Spl.) (Mains) 2008
Repo Rate is the Rate at which the RBI lends money to
commercial banks in the event of any shortfall of funds in
the short term. It is the (fixed) interest rate at which the RBI
provides overnight liquidity to banks against the collateral of
government and other approved securities under the liquidity
adjustment facility (LAF). Repo Rate is used by the RBI to
control inflation.
252. The rate of interest at which Reserve Bank of India lends
short term funds to the Commercial Banks is known as:
(a) Repo Rate
(b) Reverse Repo Rate
(c) Prime Lending Rate (PLR)
(d) None of the above
Ans. (a)
U.P. Lower Sub. (Pre) 2013
See the explanation of above question.
253. The rate at which banks lend to Reserve Bank of India
is known as :
(a) Bank Rate (b) Repo Rate
(c) Reverse Repo Rate (d) Interest Rate
U.P.P.C.S. (Spl.) (Mains) 200s
Ans. (c)
Economic & Social Development General Studies E-270
Reverse Repo Rate is the interest rate at which Central Bank
(RBI) borrows money from commercial banks for a short
term. Through this, the RBI absorbs surplus money from
banks against the collateral of eligible government securities
on an overnight basis.
254. Consider the following statements:
1. The Repo Rate is the rate at which other banks
borrow from the Reserve Bank of India.
2. A value of 1 for Gini Coefficient in a country implies
that there is perfectly equal income for everyone in
its population.
Which of the statements given above is/are correct?
(a) 1 only
(c) Both 1 and 2
Ans. (a)
(b) 2 only
(d) Neither 1 nor 2
I.A.S. (Pre) 2007
Repo (Re-purchase Option) Rate is the rate at which RBI
lends to commercial banks and Reverse Repo Rate is the
rate at which RBI borrows from commercial banks. In case
of inflationary tendencies, RBI can hike the Reverse Repo
Rate and absorb the excess liquidity in the market. Similarly,
in case there is perceived need to inject liquidity into the
system, RBI can reduce the Repo Rate, which will lead to a
release of money into the market. RBI occasionally resorts
to the Repo route to fine-tune the liquidity position, without
resorting to major policy instruments such as change in CRR
and Bank Rate. However, markets are bound to react to
frequent changes in the Repo rates and this will be reflected
in corresponding changes in the deposit and lending rates of
commercial banks. Hence, statement 1 is correct.
A value of 1 for Gini Coefficient in a country implies that
there is perfectly unequal income for everyone. Value of o
for Gini Coefficient shows perfectly equal income. Hence,
statement 2 is incorrect.
255. Consider the following statements :
1. Bank Rate is the rate of interest which RBI charges
its clients on their short-term borrowing.
2. Repo Rate is the rate of interest which RBI charges
its clients on their long-term borrowing.
Which of the statements given above is / are incorrect?
(a) 1 only
(c) Both 1 and 2
Ans. (c)
(b) 2 only
(d) Neither 1 nor 2
56th to 59th B.P.S.C. (Pre) 2015
Economic & Social Development
Bank Rate is the rate at which the Reserve Bank is ready to buy
or rediscount bills of exchange or other commercial papers. In
general terms, a bank rate is the interest rate at which nation's
Central Bank (RBI) lends money to commercial banks for long
term financial requirements. Hence, statement (1) is incorrect.
Under Repo Rate, RBI lends money to commercial banks for
a short term. Hence, statement (2) is also incorrect. Thus, the
option (c) is the correct answer.
256. Inflation rate based on Consumer Price Index increases
if:
(a) Bank Rate is decreased
(b) Reverse Repo Rate is decreased
(c) Statutory Liquidity Ratio is increased
(d) Repo Rate is increased
Ans. (*)
R.A.S./R.T.S. (Pre) 2016
The demand side is important in CPI based inflation. There
is a inverse relationship between all four given instruments
of monetary policy and inflation. Hence, increase in Repo
Rate and SLR ratio will reduce inflation, while decrease in
Reverse Repo Rate and Bank Rate will increase the rate of
inflation. Therefore, option (a) and (b) both are correct. As per
Rajasthan Public Service Commission, option (d) is correct,
which is not the right answer.
257. An increase in the Bank Rate generally indicates that
the:
(a) Market rate of interest is likely to fall
(b) Central Bank is no longer making loans to commercial
banks
(c) Central Bank is following an easy money policy
(d) Central Bank is following a tight money policy
Ans. (d)
I.A.S. (Pre) 2013
Bank Rate is the rate at which the RBI extends credit to commercial banks. The money that commercial banks repay to
RBI is the interest amount on the loans. An increase in Bank
Rate means hike in commercial banks' borrowing cost, which
reduces the supply of money in the market. It means the
Central Bank is following a tight (contractionary) money
policy. Hence, option (d) is correct.
258. The lowering of Bank Rate by the Reserve Bank of
India leads to :
(a) more liquidity in the market
(b) less liquidity in the market
(c) no change in the liquidity in the market
(d) mobilization of more deposits by Commercial Banks
Ans. (a)
General Studies
I.A.S. (Pre) 2011
E-271
Bank Rate is the rate at which the RBI lends to the commercial banks. So, when this rate is reduced, banks borrow more
and lend more to retail loan seekers and, thus infuse more
liquidity in the market.
259. Bank Rate implies the rate of interest :
(a) paid by the Reserve Bank of India on the deposits of
commercial banks
(b) charged by banks on loans and advances
(c) payable on bonds
(d) at which the Reserve Bank of India discounts the Bills
of Exchange
Ans. (d)
I.A.S. (Pre) 1995
U.P.P.C.S. (Mains) 2008
Bank Rate implies the rate of interest at which the RBI
discounts the Bills of Exchange. In other words, it is the rate
of interest at which RBI provides loans to the commercial
banks. It is an instrument of monetary policy to influence
money supply in the economy.
260. Bank rate means :
(a) Interest rate charge by moneylenders
(b) Interest rate charged by Scheduled Banks
(c) Rate of profit of banking institution
(d) Official rate of interest charged by Central Bank
(e) None of the above/More than one of the above
The difference between Repo Rate and Reverse Repo
Rate was I percent in between June, 2010 to June, 2011
In 2011-12, the RBI changed the operating procedure of
monetary policy and then only Repo Rate was determined
and Reverse Repo Rate was automatically adjusted 1.00
percent below the Repo Rate. But, currently this expected
difference of 1% is not effective. At present (as on 5 June.
2026), Policy Repo Rate is at 5.25% while Fixed Reverse
Repo Rate is at 3.35%.
263. The Policy Repo Rate and Reverse Repo Rate
announced by Reserve Bank of India on December 5.
2019 were respectively :
(a) 6% and 5.75%
(c) 5.15% and 4.9%
Ans. (c)
(b) 5.40% and 5.15%
(d) 5.75% and 5.5%
U.P.B.E.O. (Pre) 2019
The Policy Repo Rate and Reverse Repo Rate announced
by Reserve Bank of India (RBI) in its Monetary policy on
December 5, 2019 was 5.15% and 4.90% respectively. As on 5
June, 2026 Repo Rate is at 5.25% while Fixed Reverse Repo
Rate is at 3.35%. Bank Rate and MSF Rate are both at 5.50%.
264. As on September 30, 2014, Policy Review of Reserve
Bank of India Repo Rate Stands at:
60th and 62nd B.P.S.C. (Pre) 2016
Ans. (d)
(a) 7.75%
(c) 8.25%
See the explanation of above question. Ans. (b)
261. Bank Rate means the rate of interest :
(a) Paid by banks to depositors
(b) Charged by banks from borrowers
(b) 8.00%
(d) 8.50%
U.P.P.C.S. (Mains) 2014
As per the question period option (b) was the correct answer.
At present (as on 5 June, 2026) RBI's Policy Rates and
Reserve Ratios are as follows :
(c) Charged on inter-bank loans
(d) Charged by Reserve Bank of India on loans given to
commercials banks
Policy Repo Rate 5.25%
Fixed Reverse Repo Rate 3.35%
M.P.P.C.S (Pre) 1993
U.P.P.C.S (Pre) 2009
U.P.P.C.S. (Mains) 2011
Standing Deposit Facility Rate 5.00%
MSF Rate 5.50%
Bank rate 5.50%
Ans. (d) CRR 3.00%
See the explanation of above question. SLR 18.00%
262. In the last one year i.e., June 2010 to June 2011, the
difference between Repo Rate and Reverse Repo Rate
is in the order of:
265. In October 2001, Reserve Bank of India reduced Bank
Rate from 7% to :
(a) 6.50% (b) 6.75%
(a) 0.25 percent (b) 0.50 percent (c) 6.25% (c) 0.75 percent (d) 1.00 percent (d) 6.00%
U.P.P.C.S. (Mains) 2010 U.P.P.C.S. (Pre) 2002
Ans. (d) Ans. (a)
Economic & Social Development General Studies E-272
In October 2001, Reserve Bank of India cut the Bank Rate
by 0.5 percent. So Bank Rate had been reduced to 6.5% from
7%. In February 2012, the Marginal Standing Facility (MSF)
Rate was alligned to the Bank Rate. At present (as on 5 June.
2026), Bank Rate and MSF Rate both are at 5.50%
266. According to the Reserve Bank of India's Monetary
Policy Review on 29 September, 2015, Bank Rate was:
(a) 8.75%
(c) 7.75%
(e) None of the above
Ans. (c)
(b) 6.75%
(d) 9.75%
Chhattisgarh P.C.S. (Pre) 2016
As per the question period, the Bank Rate was at 7.75%.
At present (as on 5 June, 2026) the Bank Rate is at 5.50%.
267. Consider the following Governors of Reserve Bank of
India and arrange them in chronological order :
I. Dr. C. Rangarajan
III. Dr. D. Subbarao
II. Dr. I.G. Patel
IV. Dr. Manmohan Singh
Select correct answer using the code given below:
(a) IV, II, III and
(c) IV, I, II and IIШ
(b) II, IV, I and III
(d) II, I, IV and III
U.P. R.O./A.R.O. (Pre) 2021
As per Section 7 (1) of RBI Act, the (entral Covernment
may from time to fime give sch direction to the RBI as
it may, after consultation with the Crovernor of the RBI
consider necessary in the public interest However, there is
no such provision given in the Constitution of India Hence
statement 2 is incorrect
As per Section 7 (3) of RBI Act, the Ciorvernor and in his
absence the Deputy Governor nominated by him in this
behalf, shall also have powers of general superintendence and
direction of the affairs and the business of the Bank, and may
exercise all powers and do all acts and things which may he
exercised or done by the Bank Hence, statement s correct
269. Who among the following has not been the Governer
of Reserve Bank of India?
(a) Manmohan Singh
(c) C. Rangarajan
Ans. (d)
(b) Bimal Jalan
(d) Raja J (helltah
U.P.P.C.S. (Mains) 2005
Raja J. Chelliah has not been the Governor of Reserve Bank
of India (RBI). While the rest three have been the Governors
of the RBI.
RBI Governor Tenure
Ans. (b) Manmohan Singh 1982 to 1985
Governors Tenures Bimal Jalan 1997 to 2003
1. Dr. C. Rangarajan 22.12.1992 – 22.11.1997 C. Rangarajan 1992 to 1997
II. Dr. I.G. Patel 01.12.1977 – 15.09.1982
III. Dr. D. Subbarao 05.09.2008 – 04.09.2013
IV. Dr. Manmohan Singh :
At present, Sanjay Malhotra is the Governor of the RBI He
assumed office on 11 December, 2024 as the 26h Governor
of the RBI.
Hence, option (b) is the correct answer.
16.09.1982 – 14.01.1985
268. Consider the following statements :
1. The Governor of the Reserve Bank of India (RBI)
is appointed by the Central Government.
2. Certain provisions in the Constitution of India
give the Central Government the right to issue
directions to the RBI in public interest.
3. The Governor of the RBI draws his power from
the RBI Act.
Which of the above statements are correct?
(a) 1 and 2 only
(c) 1 and 3 only
Ans. (c)
(b) 2 and 3 only
(d) 1, 2 and 3
I.A.S. (Pre) 2021
As per Section 8 (1) (a) of RBI Act, 1934, a Governor and
(not more than 4) Deputy Governors are to be appointed by
[the Central Government. Hence, statement 1 is correct.
270. At present, who is the Governor of the Reserve Bank
of India?
(a) Urjit Patel
(c) Shanta Kumar
(b) Raghuram Rajan
(d) Lalita D. Gupta
(e) None of the above/More than one of the above
Ans. (e)
64th B.P.S.C. (Pre) 2018
63d B.P.S.C. (Pre) 2017
Uttarakhand P.C.S. (Pre) 2016
Sanjay Malhotra is serving as the current and 26h Govemor
of the Reserve Bank of India since 11 December, 2024. Before
him, Shaktikantha Das was the Governor of the RBI from
12 December, 2018 to 10 December, 2024 Dr Urit Patel
was the Governor of the RBI from 4 September, 2016 to 11
December, 2018 and Dr. Raghuram Rajan was the Governor
of the RBI from 4 September, 2013 to 4 September, 2016
Economic & Social Development General Studies E-273
In October 2001, Reserve Bank of India cut the Bank Rate
by 0.5 percent. So Bank Rate had been reduced to 6.5% from
7%. In February 2012, the Marginal Standing Facility (MSF)
Rate was alligned to the Bank Rate. At present (as on 5 June,
2026), Bank Rate and MSF Rate both are at 5.50%.
266. According to the Reserve Bank of India's Monetary
Policy Review on 29 September, 2015, Bank Rate was :
(a) 8.75%
(c) 7.75%
(e) None of the above
Ans. (c)
(b) 6.75%
(d) 9.75%
Chhattisgarh P.C.S. (Pre) 2016
As per the question period, the Bank Rate was at 7.75%.
At present (as on 5 June, 2026) the Bank Rate is at 5.50%.
267. Consider the following Governors of Reserve Bank of
India and arrange them in chronological order :
I. Dr. C. Rangarajan
III. Dr. D. Subbarao
II. Dr. I.G. Patel
As per Section 7 (1) of RBI Act, the Central Government
may from time to time give such direction to the RBI1 as
it may, after consultation with the Governor of the RBI,
consider necessary in the public interest. However, there is
no such provision given in the Constitution of India Hence.
statement 2 is incorrect.
As per Section 7 (3) of RBI Act, the Governor and in his
absence the Deputy Governor nominated by him in this
behalf, shall also have powers of general superintendence and
direction of the affairs and the business of the Bank, and may
exercise all powers and do all acts and things which may be
exercised or done by the Bank. Hence, statement 3 is correct.
269. Who among the following has not been the Governor
of Reserve Bank of India ?
(a) Manmohan Singh (b) Bimal Jalan
(d) Raja J. Chelliah
U.P.P.C.S. (Mains) 2005
Raja J. Chelliah has not been the Governor of Reserve Bank
of India (RBI). While the rest three have been the Governors
of the RBI.
(c) C. Rangarajan
IV. Dr. Manmohan Singh Ans. (d)
Select correct answer using the code given below :
(a) IV, II, III and I
(c) IV, I, II and IШ
(b) II, IV, I and III
(d) II, I, IV and III
U.P. R.O./A.R.O. (Pre) 2021 RBI Governor Tenure
Ans. (b) Manmohan Singh - 1982 to 1985
Governors Tenures Bimal Jalan 1997 to 2003
1. Dr. C. Rangarajan 22.12.1992 – 22.11.1997 C. Rangarajan 1992 to 1997
II. Dr. I.G. Patel 01.12.1977 – 15.09.1982 At present, Sanjay Malhotra is the Governor of the RBI. He III. Dr. D. Subbarao 05.09.2008 – 04.09.2013
IV. Dr. Manmohan Singh
assumed office on 11 December, 2024 as the 26th Governor
of the RBI.
Hence, option (b) is the correct answer.
16.09.1982 – 14.01.1985
268. Consider the following statements:
1. The Governor of the Reserve Bank of India (RBI)
is appointed by the Central Government.
2. Certain provisions in the Constitution of India
give the Central Government the right to issue
directions to the RBI in public interest.
3. The Governor of the RBI draws his power from
the RBI Act.
Which of the above statements are correct?
(a) 1 and 2 only
(c) 1 and 3 only
Ans. (c)
(b) 2 and 3 only
(d) 1, 2 and 3
I.A.S. (Pre) 2021
As per Section 8 (1) (a) of RBI Act, 1934, a Governor and
(not more than 4) Deputy Governors are to be appointed by
the Central Government. Hence, statement 1 is correct.
270. At present, who is the Governor of the Reserve Bank
of India?
(a) Urjit Patel
(c) Shanta Kumar
(b) Raghuram Rajan
(d) Lalita D. Gupta
(e) None of the above/More than one of the above
Ans. (e)
64th B.P.S.C. (Pre) 2018
63rd B.P.S.C. (Pre) 2017
Uttarakhand P.C.S. (Pre) 2016
Sanjay Malhotra is serving as the current and 26th Governor
of the Reserve Bank of India since 11 December, 2024. Before
him, Shaktikantha Das was the Governor of the RBI from
12 December, 2018 to 10 December, 2024. Dr. Urjit Patel
was the Governor of the RBI from 4 September, 2016 to 11
December, 2018 and Dr. Raghuram Rajan was the Governor
of the RBI from 4 September, 2013 to 4 September, 2016.
Economic & Social Development General Studies E-273
271. The Committee on Financial Sector Assessment is 274. Negotiable Instruments Act came into effect in:
co-chaired by whom? (a) 1881 (b) 1882
(a) Governor of Reserve Bank of India and Finance
Minister of India
(c) 1883
Ans. (b)
(c) Governor and Deputy Governor of Reserve Bank of
India
(b) Deputy Governor of Reserve Bank of India and
Finance Secretary, Government of India
(d) 1884
U.P. R.O./A.R.O. (Pre) 2016
(d) Prime Minister of India and Governor of Reserve Bank
of India
Ans. (b)
M.P. P.C.S. (Pre) 2020
A Committee on Financial Sector Assessment (CFSA) was
constituted by the Government of India in 2006, in consultation with the Reserve Bank with the objective of undertaking
a self-assessment of financial sector stability and development. The Chairman of the Committee was Dr. Rakesh
Mohan (the then Deputy Governor, RBI). The Committee
was co-chaired by Ashok Jha (the then Finance Secretary;
September 13, 2006 - July 15, 2007), Dr. D. Subbarao (the
then Finance Secretary; July 16, 2007 - September 5, 2008)
and Ashok Chawla (the then Secretary, Dept. of Economic
Affairs, Ministry of Finance; from September 6, 2008). The
Committee submitted its report in March, 2009.
272. The accounting year of the Reserve Bank of India is:
(a) April - March
(c) October - September
Ans. (a)
(b) July - June
(d) January - December
I.A.S. (Pre) 1998
As per the question period, the accounting year of the
Reserve Bank of India was July-June. Earlier it was JanuaryDecember, which was changed into July-June on 11 March,
1940. At present, accounting year of the RBI is alligned with
the fiscal year of the Government (i.e. April-March). The year
2020-21 was significant for the change in the accounting
year of the RBI to April-March (from earlier July-June). Due
to this transition, the accounting year 2020-21 was of nine
months only, i.e., July 2020- March 2021. From fiscal year
2021-22 onwards, RBI's accounting year starts on April 1.
273. The financial year for banks is April-March; but what
is the financial year for RBI?
(a) January-December
(c) October - September
Ans. (b)
(b) April-March
(d) July - June
U.P.P.C.S. (Mains) 2013
See the explanation of above question.
Economic & Social Development
The Negotiable Instruments Act (NIA, 1881) was passed in
December, 1881 but came into effect on 1 March, 1882
Recently, the Negotiable Instrument (Amendment) Act,
2018 is enacted. On 2 August, 2018, the President gave his
assent to this Act. By way of this amendment, section 143А
and section 148 have been inserted in the NIAct, to ensure
that the payee of a dishonoured cheque is offered a greater
protection and to discourage frivolous and unnecessary
litigation, saving the time and money of the litigating parties
as well as of the courts.
275. Which one of the following is different from others?
(a) UTI
(b) Canbank Financial Services
(c) State Bank of India
(d) U.P. State Financial Corporation
Ans. (*)
U.P.P.C.S. (Pre) 1998
All of the given institutions are different from others on
one or another basis. UTI is a mutual fund company while
other three are financial institutions. Canbank Financial
Services Ltd. is a subsidiary of Canara Bank whereas other
three are autonomous institutions. State Bank of India is a
commercial bank and it is different from others in this way,
and U.P. State Financial Corporation is a public enterprise of
State Government, while other three are public enterprises
of Central Government.
276. Meaning of company limited by shares is :
(a) Limited Investment
(b) Limited holders
(c) Restricted liability of holders
(d) All the above
Ans. (c)
M.P.P.C.S. (Pre) 1991
According to Companies Act 2013, a company that is limited
by shares refers to a company that has the liability of the
members (shareholders) limited by such an amount that is
unpaid on their respectively held shares. The company can
enact this liability while the company is in existence or as it
is ending. When incorporating a company limited by shares.
General Studies E-274
the total share capital consists of all of the shares held by each
member at incorporation. Those shares can either be: fully
paid; partly paid; or unpaid. Partly paid or unpaid shares are
shares where a member is due to pay the company. In contrast,
fully paid shares are where the full value of the shares have
been paid to the company. In companies limited by shares,
the liability of members is limited to any unpaid amount of
shares that they hold. If a member has fully paid for their
shares, they should have no further liabilities as a member.
277.Which one of the following is not a feature of Limited
Liability Partnership firm?
(a) Partners should be less than 20
(b) Partnership and management need not be separate
(c) Internal governance may be decided by mutual
agreement among partners
(d) It is corporate body with perpetual succession
Ans. (a)
I.A.S. (Pre) 2010
Limited Liability Partnership (LLP) is an alternative corporate business form that gives the benefits of limited liability
of a company and the flexibility of partnership. In LLPs partnership and management need not be separate and internal
governance may be decided by mutual agreement among
partners. It is a corporate body with perpetual succession. A
minimum of two partners will be required for formation of
an LLP. There is not any limit to the maximum number of
partners. Hence, option (a) is the correct answer.
278. An International Financial Services Centre has been
set up at :
(a) Gandhinagar
(c) Ahmedabad
Ans. (a)
(b) Mumbai
(d) Bengaluru
U.P. P.C.S. (Mains) 2016
The International Financial Services Centres Authority
(IFSCA) has been established on April 27, 2020 under the
International Financial Services Centres Authority Act, 2019.
It is headquartered at GIFT City, Gandhinagar in Gujarat.
The IFSCA is a unified authority for the development and
regulation of financial products, financial services and
financial institutions in the International Financial Services
Centre (IFSC) in India. At present, the GIFT IFSC is the
maiden international financial services centre in India.
Prior to the establishment of IFSCA, the domestic financial
regulators, namely, RBI, SEBI, PFRDA and IRDAI regulated
the business in IFSC.
Economic & Social Development
279. Industrial Finance Corporation of India works as :
(a) A commercial bank
(c) An industrial bank
Ans. (b)
(b) A development bank
(d) None of the above
U.P.P.C.S. (Mains) 2012
IFCI Ltd. (IFCI) was set up as a Statutory Corporation ('The
Industrial Finance Corporation of India') in 1 July, 1948
for providing medium and long term finance to industry.
IFCI was the first development financial institution of India
set up to propel economic growth through development of
infrastructure and industry. Since then IFCI has contributed
significantly to the economy through its continuous support
to projects in all the three spheres of growth and development
- manufacturing, infrastructure & services and agriculture
allied sectors. In 1993, after repeal of the IFC Act, IFCI
became a Public Limited Company (effected from October
1999), registered under the Companies Act, 1956. Currently,
IFCI is a Government Company with Government of India
holding 72.57% (as on 31 March, 2026) of paid-up capital
of IFCI. IFCI is also registered with the Reserve Bank of
India (RBI) as a Systemically Important Non-Deposit taking
Non-Banking Finance Company (NBFC-ND-SI) and is also
a notified Public Financial Institution under Section 2 (72)
of the Companies Act, 2013.
280. The Apex institution in the field of Industrial finance
in India is :
(a) Reserve Bank of India
(b) Industrial Finance Corporation of India
(c) Industrial Development Bank of India
(d) State Bank of India
Ans. (c)
U.P.P.C.S. (Mains) 2017
Industrial Development Bank of India (IDBI) was
established in July, 1964 as an apex financial institution
for industrial development in the country. It caters to diversified needs of medium and large scale industries in the
form of financial assistance, both direct and indirect. Direct
assistance is provided by way of underwriting of or direct
subscription to industrial securities, soft loans, project loans
etc. while indirect assistance is provided in the form of
refinance facilities to industrial concerns. In 2004, Reserve
Bank of India incorporated IDBI as a 'scheduled bank'
under the RBI Act, 1934.
281. Consider the following :
1. Industrial Finance Corporation of India
2. Industrial Credit and Investment Corporation of
General Studies
India
E-275
3. Industrial Development Bank of India
4. Unit Trust of India
The Correct sequence in which the above were
established is :
(a) 1. 2, 4,3
(c) 4, 3, 2, 1
Ans. (a)
C. Industrial Finance Corporation of
India (IFCI)
3.1990
D. Small Industries Development
Bank of India (SIDBI)
4.1955
(b) 1,3, 2, 4 Codes:
(d) 1, 4, 3,2 A B C D
I.A.S. (Pre) 1995 (a) 1
3 2
4
(b) 2 4 3
(c) 3 2 4
(d) 4 1 2 3
U.P.U.D.A./L.D.A. (Spl.) (Mains) 2018Ans. (d)
Institution Year of Establishment
1955
1964
1948
SIDBI 1990
The 'Industrial Finance Corporation of India' (IFCI) was
established in 1948, ‘Industrial Credit and Investment
Corporation of India' (ICICI) was set up in 1955, ‘Industrial
Development Bank of India' (IDBI) was established in July,
1964 and the 'Unit Trust of India (UTI) was established
in February, 1964. Hence, the correct sequence is given in
option (a).
282. Consider the following financial institutions of India:
1. Industrial Finance Corporation of India (IFCI)
2. Industrial Credit and Investment Corporation of
India (ICICI)
3. Industrial Development Bank of India (IDВІ)
4. National Bank for Agriculture and Rural Development
(NABARD)
ICICI
IDBI
IFCI
284. Match the column-A with the column-B and select thecorrect answer using the codes given below:
Column-B
1. Export-Import Bank of IndiaColumn-A
A. 1955
B. 1964
The correct chronological sequence of the establishment
of these institution is:
2. Industrial Development Bankof India
C. 1982
(a) 1, 2, 3, 4 (b) 2, 3, 4, 1
3. Industrial Credit and Investment Corporation of India
(c) 3, 4, 1,2 (d) 4, 1, 2, 3
D. 1987
I.A.S. (Pre) 2002
4. Board of Industrial and
Financial Reconstruction
Ans. (a) Codes:
Institution Year of A B C D
Establishment (a) 1 2 3 4
Industrial Finance Corporation 1948 (b) 2 3 1 4
of India (IFCI) (c) 3 2 1 4
Industrial Credit and Investment 1955 (d) 4 1 2 3
Corporation of India (ICICI)
Industrial Development Bank of 1964 Ans. (c)
India (IDBІ)
National Bank for Agriculture
and Rural Development (NABARD)
1982
283. Match the list-I with List-II and using the codes given
below the lists, select the correct answer :
List-I List-II
A. Industrial Credit and Investment
Corporation of India (ICICI)
1.1964
B. Industrial Development Bank of
India (IDBI)
2.1948
56th to 59th B.P.S.C. (Pre) 2015Export-Import Bank of India was set up in March, 1982
through Exim Bank Act, 1981. It provides financial assistance
to exporters and importers with a view to promoting thecountry's international trade. IDBI was constituted underIndustrial Development Bank of India Act, 1964 as
Development Financial Institution (DFI) and came into
being on July 01, 1964. While ICICI was formed in 1955to provide medium-term and long-term project financing
to Indian businesses and Board of Industrial and FinancialReconstruction (BIFR) was set up in January, 1987.
E-276Economic & Social Development General Studies
List-1 List-11
285. Match List-I with List-II and choose the correct answer using the code given below: Choose the correct answer from the codes given below:
Codes:
(a) 1, 2,4.3 (b) 2, 1,3,4
(Banks) (Year of Foundation) (c) 1, 2, 3, 4 (d) 1, 3, 4, 2
A. Allahabad Bank 1.1874 U.P.P.C.S. (Spl.) (Mains) 2004
B. Punjab National Bank 2.1881 Ans. (*)
C. Awadh Commercial Bank 3.1865
D. The Alliance Bank of Shimla 4. 1894
Code:
A B C D
(a) 4 3 2
(b) 2 3 4
(C) 3 4 2 1
February, 1964
Industrial Development Bank July, 1964
of India (IDBI)
- 1988
Institution
Life Insurance Corporation
of India (L.I.C.)
Unit Trust of India (U.T.I.)
Established in (Year)
1956
(d) 2 3 4
U.P. R.O./A.R.O. (Pre) 2023
Ans. (c)
The correctly matched lists are as follows:
Securities and Exchange Board
of India (SEBI)
289. When was the Life Insurance Corporation of India
established?
(a) 1956
(c) 1950 Banks Year of Foundation
(b) 1944
(d) 1947
48th to 52nd B.P.S.C. (Pre) 2008 Allahabad Bank 1865 Ans. (a)
Punjab National Bank 1894
Awadh (Oudh) Commercial Bank 1881
The Alliance Bank of Shimla 1874
Hence, option (c) is the correct answer.
286. Which of the following is a marketing institution ?
(a) SEBI
(c) SIDBI
(b) SAIL
(d) NABARD Ans. (a)
U.P.P.C.S. (Mains) 2002
See the explanation of above question.
290. The Insurance Regulatory and Development Authority was set up in India on :
(a) April, 2000
(c) April, 2002
(b) April, 2001
(d) April, 2003
Uttarakhand P.C.S. (Pre) 2012
Ans. (b)
Steel Authority of India is a marketing institution, while
SEBI (Capital Market), SIDBI (Microfinance) and NABARD
(Agricultural credit) are apex institution in their respective
fields.
287. Which one of the following is not an apex institution ?
(a) State Bank of India
(b) NABARD
(c) SIDBI
(d) State Cooperative Bank
Ans. (a)
U.P.P.C.S. (Mains) 2008
State Bank of India is a commercial bank. So it is not an apех
institution. While rest are the apex institution in their fields.
288. Arrange the following in asscending order of time in
relation to their establishment:
Following the recommendations of the Malhotra Committee
Report, in 1999, the Insurance Regulatory and Development
Authority of India (IRDAI) was constituted as an autonomous
body to regulate and develop the insurance industry. The
IRDAI was incorporated as a statutory body in April, 2000.
IRDAI is tasked with regulating and promoting insurance
and re-insurance industries in India. The key objectives of
the IRDAI include promotion of competition so as to enhance
customer satisfaction through increased consumer, choice
and lower premiums, while ensuring the financial security
of the insurance market.
291. For regulation of the insurance business in the country
the government has formed :
(a) SEBI
(b) Reserve Bank of India
(c) Insurance Regulatory and Development Authority
(d) General Insurance Corporation
Ans. (c)
See the explanation of above question.
1. LIC 2. IDBI
3. SEBІ 4. UTI
Economic & Social Development General Studies
U.P.P.C.S. (Pre) 2002
E-277
292. IRDAl regulates :
(a) Banking Companies
(c) Retail Trade
Ans. (b)
(b) Insurance Companies
(d) None of the above
U.P.P.C.S. (Pre) 2007
U.P.P.C.S. (Mains) 2005
See the explanation of above question.
293. IRDAI has set up a panel under whose chairmanship
to examine need for standard cyber liability insurance
product?
(a) Pravin Kutumbe
(c) K. Ganesh
Ans. (b)
(b) P. Umesh
(d) T.L. Alamelu
Chhattisgarh P.C.S. (Pre) 2020
The Insurance Regulatory and Development Authority of
India (IRDAI) had set up a panel in October, 2020 under the
chairmanship of P. Umesh to examine need for standard cyber
liability insurance product. This panel was tasked to explore
possibility of a basic standard product structure to provide
insurance cover for individuals and establishments to manage
their cyber risks. The panel had been asked to study various
statutory provisions on information and cybersecurity, and to
evaluate critical issues involving legal aspects of transactions
in cyber space.
294. The word ‘Actuaries' is related to :
(a) Banking
(c) Share market
Ans. (b)
(b) Insurance
(d) None of the above
U.P.P.C.S. (Pre) 2008
Actuaries is related to insurance sector. A business
professional who deals with risk assessment, uncertainty
and estimation of premium etc. for an insurance business is
called an actuary.
295. 'Principle of Indemnity' does not apply to:
(a) Life Insurance
(c) Fire Insurance
Ans. (a)
(b) Marine Insurance
(d) All of the above
U.P.P.C.S. (Mains) 2009
The purpose of the indemnity principle is to set back the
insured at the same financial position as he/she was before
the loss occurred. All insurance contracts of fire or marine
insurance are contracts of indemnity. The insurer undertakes
to compensate the insured for the loss caused to him/her due
to damage or destruction of property insured. This principle
of indemnity is not applicable to life insurance because one
cannot estimate the loss due to the death of a person.
Economic & Social Development
296. Provident Fund in India is :
(a) Contractual savings
(b) Residual Savings
(c) Voluntary Savings
(d) Employer's savings
Ans. (a)
U.P.P.C.S. (Pre) 1998Provident Fund in India is contract based savings. It is a
government managed, mandatory retirement savingsscheme.
Provident fund is the portion of the income ofemployees thathas to be deposited with the government on contractbasis. An
employee gives a portion of his/her salary to the providentfund and an employer should make a contribution on behalfof his employees. It is government liability, not an income.
297. Money received by the Government under the 'StateProvident Funds' is credited to the :
(a) Contingency Fund
(b) Consolidated Fund
(c) General Development Fund
(d) Public Accounts Fund
Ans. (d)
Jharkhand P.C.S. (Pre) 2013The Constitution of India provides three types of funds ofthe Central Government : (i) Consolidated Fund of India(ii) Contingency Fund of India (iii) Public Account ofIndia. Money received by the Government under the 'StateProvident Funds' is credited to the Public Accounts Fund.
298. Importance of which of the following institution inIndia has reduced to most:
(a) Private Bank
(c) Exim Bank
Ans. (d)
(b) Development Bank
(d) Pension Funds
U.P.P.C.S. (GIC) 2010A pension fund is also known as a superannuation fund, isany plan or scheme which provides retirement income. InIndia, among the given options, importance of pension fundshas reduced to most.
299. In India, which of the following is regulated by theForward Markets Commission?
(a) Currency Futures Trading
(b) Commodities Futures Trading
(c) Equity Futures Trading
(d) Both Commodities Futures and Financial FutureTrading
Ans. (b)
General Studies
I.A.S. (Pre) 2010E-278
Forward Markets Commission (FMC) was established in 1953
EMC was the chief regulator of commodity futures markets in India. On 28 September, 2015, the FMC was merged with the
Securities and Exchange Board of India (SEBI).
300. Which among the following agency regulate the mutual
funds in India ?
(a) SEBI
(b) National Stock Exchange
c) Reserve Bank of India
(d) Indian Bank Association
Ans. (a)
U.P.P.C.S. (Mains) 2013
The Securities and Exchange Board of India (SEBI) was
established as a non-statutory body in 1988. It was constituted
as astatutory body on April 12, 1992, in accordance with
the provisions of the SEBI Act, 1992. It is headquartered in
Mumbai. Its regional offices are located in Kolkata, Delhi
and Chennai. SEBI is primarily set up to protect the investors
in securities market (share market/stock exchange) and to
promote and development of and to regulate the securities
market for the matters connected therewith or incidental
thereto. Mututal funds are also regulated and monitored by
the SEBI, which strives to protect the interest of investors.
301. SEBI Act was passed in the year :
(a) 1956
(c) 1992
Ans. (c)
(b) 1962
(d) 2013
U.P. R.O./A.R.O. (Pre) 2016
See the explanation of above question.
302. Which of the following controls the working of share
market in India ?
(a) FEMА
(c) MRTP Act
Ans. (b)
(b) SEBI
(d) None of the above
U.P.P.C.S. (Mains) 2012
See the explanation of above question.
303. Which one of the following organization is the main
regulator of stock markets in India?
(a) Controller of Capital of Stocks
(b) Ministry of Finance
(c) Indian Company Law Board
(d) Security and Exchange Board of India
Ans. (d)
See the explanation of above question.
U.P.P.C.S. (Pre) 1996
Economic & Social Development
304. To prevent recurrence of scams in Indian capital
market, the Government of India has asigned regulatory powers to :
(a) SEBI
(c) SBI
Ans. (a)
(b) RBI
(d) ICICІ
I.A.S. (Pre) 1995
U.P.P.C.S. (Mains) 2005
See the explanation of above question.
305. Which one of the following is related to the regulation
of stock exchange operations?
(a) SAIL
(b) SEBI
(c) SIDBI
(d) Stock Holding Corporation of India
Ans. (b)
U.P.P.C.S. (Spl.) (Mains) 2004
See the explanation of above question.
306. Consider the following statements:
I. The Reserve Bank of India mandates all the
listed companies in India to submit a Business
Responsibility and Sustainability Report (BRSR).
II. In India, a company submitting a BRSR makes
disclosures in the report that are largely nonfinancial in nature.
Which of the statements given above is/are correct?
(a) I only
(c) Both I and II
Ans. (b)
(b) II only
(d) Neither I nor II
I.A.S. (Pre) 2025
The Business Responsibility and Sustainability Reporting
(BRSR) is a disclosure framework introduced in India by
SEBI (Securities and Exchange Board of India), not by the
RBI.
Therefore, (i) the regulator is SEBI, not the RBI, and
(ii) BRSR is not mandatory for all listed companies; it is
mandatory mainly for the top 1,000 listed entities (i.e., the
top 1,000 listed entities by market capitalization). Hence,
Statement I is factually incorrect. The information to be
disclosed under BRSR is mainly Environmental, Social and
Governance (ESG) in nature- i.e., it is predominantly nonfinancial. This is what Statement II says, so it is correct. Thus,
only Statement II is correct.
307. Private Sector Mutual Funds in India were permitted in :
(a) 1964
General Studies
(b) 1993
E-279
(c)
Ans. (b)
1994 (d) 2001
U.P.P.C.S. (Pre) 2011
The mutual fund industry in India started in 1964 with the
formation of Unit Trust of India, at the initiative of the
Government of India and Reserve Bank of India.
Unit Trust of India (UTI) was established on 1 February,
1964 under the UTI Act, 1963 of the Parliament. It was set
up by the Reserve Bank of India and functioned under the
regulatory and administrative control of the Reserve Bank
of India. In 1978. UTI was de-linked from the RBI and the
Industrial Development Bank of India (IDBI) took over the
regulatory and administrative control in place of RBI. The
first scheme launched by UTI was Unit Scheme (US) 1964.
1987 marked the entry of non-UTI, public sector mutual funds
set up by public sector banks and Life Insurance Corporation
of India (LIC) and General Insurance Corporation of India
(GIC). SBI Mutual Fund was the first non-UTI Mutual
Fund established in June, 1987. LIC established its mutual
fund in June, 1989 while GIC had set up its mutual fund in
December, 1990.
With the entry of private sector funds in 1993, a new era
started in the Indian mutual fund industry, giving the Indian
investors a wider choice of fund families. Also, 1993 was
the year in which the first Mutual Funds Regulations came
into being, under which all mutual funds, except UTI were
to be registered and governed. The erstwhile Kothari Pioneer
(now merged with Franklin Templeton) was the first private
sector mutual fund registered in July, 1993.
The 1993 SEBI (Mutual Funds) Regulations were substituted
by a more comprehensive and revised Mutual Funds
Regulations in 1996. The industry now functions under the
SEBI (Mutual Funds) Regulations, 1996.
In February 2003, following the repeal of the Unit Trust
of India Act 1963, UTI was bifurcated into two separate
entities: One is the Specified Undertaking of the Unit Trust
of India. The Specified Undertaking of Unit Trust of India,
functioning under an administrator and under the rules framed
by Government of India and does not come under the purview
of the Mutual Funds Regulations.
The second is the UTI Mutual Fund, sponsored by SBI, PNB,
BOB and LIC. It is registered with SEBI and functions under
the Mutual Funds Regulations.
308. Recently, Unit Scheme 1964 was in news, because:
(a) Its net worth has dropped significantly due to the long
slump in the stock market.
(b) It's net worth has increased significantly.
(c) It's net worth has unchanged
(d) None of the above
Ans. (a)
U.P. Lower Sub. (Pre) 199%In 1998, media reports appeared claiming that things were
seriously wrong with UTI's Unit Scheme (US)-64. For the
first time in its 32 years of existence, US-64 faced depletingfunds and redemptions exceeded sales. Between July, 1995
and March, 1996, funds declined by Rs. 3,104 crore.
An ICFAI case study quoted analysts as saying that the
depleting corpus coupled with the redemptions could soon
result in a liquidity crisis.
Soon, reports regarding the lack of proper fund management
and internal control systems at UTI added to the growing
investor frenzy. By October 1998, US-64's equity component's market value had come down to Rs. 4,200 crore fromits acquisition price of Rs. 8,200 crore. The net asset value(NAV) of US-64 also declined significantly during 1993-1996due to turbulent stock market conditions. One survey citiedUS-64's NAV at Rs. 9.68. The US-64 units, which were sold
at Rs. 14.55 and repurchased at Rs. 14.25 in October 1998.thus were around 50% and 47%, above their estimated NAV
309. The objective of Unit Trust of India is :
(a) To give the benefit of its earnings to small investors
(b) To invest in such a way as to promote industrialdevelopment
(c) To mobilise public savings
(d) All of the above
Ans. (d)
U.P.P.C.S. (Spl.) (Mains) 2004The Unit Trust of India (UTI) was set up on February 1, 1964
to promote and pool the small savings from the lower and
middle class income me person those who cannot have directaccess to the stock exchange. It also provides them with an
opportunity to share the benefits of prosperity resulting inrapid industrialization in India. On 1 February, 2003, UTIwas bifurcated into two separate entities. One is representingbroadly, the assets of US-64 scheme, assured return and
certain other schemes. The second is the UTI mutual fund.sponsored by SBI, PNB, BOB and LIC. It is registered with
the SEBI and functions under the mutual fund regulations
Hence, option (d) is the correct answer.
310. Which one of the following is the largest mutual fundorganization in India?
(a) SBI Mutual Fund
Economic & Social Development General Studies
(b) GIC Mutual Fund
E-280
(c) Ind Bank Mutual Fund (d) Unit Trust of India
Ans. (a)
(c) 2 and 3 (d) none
I.A.S. (Pre) 1995 I.A.S. (Pre) 2005
Ans. (a)
As per the question period, Unit Trust of India was the largest
mutual fund organization in India. At present, SBI Mutual
Fund is the largest mutual fund organization in India (in terms
of AUM-assets under management) with reference to Asset
Management Companies.
311. The Head Office of National Stock Exchange of India
is located at:
(a) Mumbai
(c) Delhi
Ans. (a)
(b) Calcutta
(d) Ahmedabad
M.P.P.C.S. (Pre) 1996
National Stock Exchange of India was established in
November, 1992 on the recommendation of Manohar J.
Pherwani Committee. The head office of NSE of India is
located at Mumbai.
312. The promoter of National Stock Exchange of India is:
(a) State Bank of India
(c) IDBI
Ans. (d)
(b) LIC and GIC
(d) All the above
U.P.P.C.S. (Pre) 2013
National Stock Exchange of India was set up in November,
1992 on the recommendation of Manohar J. Pherwani
Committee. It was recognised as a stock exchange by SEBI
in April, 1993 and commenced operations in 1994 with the
launch of the wholesale debt market, followed shortly after
by the launch of the cash market segment. The promoters of
NSE of India were IDBI, SBI, IFCI, LIC, GIC, IDFC etc.
At present (as on 31 March, 2026), promoter and promoter
group shareholding in NSE of India is zero, while public
shareholding and non promoter-non public shareholding
are at 64.18% and 35.82% respectively. At present major
institutional shareholders of NSE are SBI, Stock Holding
Corporation of India Ltd., LIC and various other public sector
insurance companies.
313. Consider the following statements:
1. Sensex is based on 50 of the most important stocks
available on the Bombay Stock Exchange (BSE).
2. For calculating the Sensex, all the stocks are assigned
proportional weightage.
3. New York Stock Exchange is the oldest stock
exchange in the world.
Which of the statement/s given above is/are correct?
(a) 2 only
Sensex is calculated using a 'Market CapitalizationWeighted' methodology. As per this methodology, the level of
index at any point of time reflects the total market value of 30
component stocks relative to a base period. For calculating the
Sensex, all the stocks are assigned proportional weightage.
The Amsterdam Stock Exchange (ASE), which lays claim of
being the oldest continuing stock market, has embarked upon
a series of initiatives to win back trading lost to London. What
began in the 17th century as dealings in shares of the United
East India Company in coffee house along Bam Square and
grew into the world's third largest market by 1940's the
ASE is now finding itself struggling to hold onto its fifteenth
ranking worldwide.
The New York Stock Exchange traces its origin to 1792,
when 24 New York city stockbrokers and merchants signed
the Buttonwood Agreement. This agreement set in motion the
NYSE's unwavering commitment to investors and issuers.
314. A rise in 'SENSEX' means:
(a) a rise in prices of shares of all companies registered
with Bombay Stock Exchange
(b) a rise in prices of shares of all companies registered
with National Stock Exchange
(c) an overall rise in prices of shares of group of companies
registered with Bombay Stock Exchange
(d) a rise in prices of shares of all companies belonging to
a group of companies registered with Bombay Stock
Exchange
Ans. (c)
I.A.S. (Pre) 2000
The BSE SENSEX is a free-float market-weighted stock
market index of 30 well-established and financially sound
companies listed on the Bombay Stock Exchange. A rise in
'SENSEX' means an overall rise in prices of shares of this
group of 30 companies.
315. 'SENSEX’ is the popular Index of Bombay Stock Exchange (BSE). It is measured on the basis of how many
blue chip companies listed in BSE?
(a) 20
(c) 25
(b) 30
(d) 10
U.P.P.C.S. (Pre) 2021
Ans. (b)
(b) 1 and 3
See the explanation of above question.
General Studies E-281 Economic & Social Development
316. BSE Sensex' is an index to measure ups and downs in
the share market. The number of companies covered
under the index are
Which of the above mentioned causes are correcs(a) A and B
(c) А, B and C
(b) 50
(d) 150 Ans. (c)
U.P.P.C.S. (Mains) 2005
(b) A and C
(d) B and C
R.A.S./R.T.S. (Pre) (a) 30
(c) 100
Ans. (a)
See the explanation of above question.
317. As on March 2014, no. of companies BSE GREENEX
Index includes was :
(a) 100
(c) 50
Ans. (d)
(b) 75
(d) 25
U.P.P.C.S. (Mains) 2014
As on March 2014, the total number of companies BSE
GREENEX Index included was 25. At present, the number
of companies is the same, that is 25. The BSE GREENEX
is designed to measure the performance of the top 25 'green
companies in terms of greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions,
market cap and liquidity. It includes the top 25 companies
from the BSE-100 Index, which are good in terms of carbon
emissions, free-float market capatalization and market turnover.
The Index is a Cap Weighted Free-Float Market Capitalization
weighted index.
318. How many companies are included in BSE-GREENEX?
(a) 25
(c) 50
Ans. (a)
(b) 40
(d) 100
U.P.P.C.S. (Pre) (Re-exam) 2015
See the explanation of above question.
319. Among the following major stock exchanges of India,
the exchange which recorded highest turnover during
the year 2000–01 is:
(a) Bombay Stock Exchange
(b) Calcutta Stock Exchange
(c) Delhi Stock Exchange
(d) National Stock Exchange
Ans. (d)
I.A.S. (Pre) 2002
The stock exchange which recorded highest turnover during
the year 2000-01 was National Stock Exchange (NSE). It had
turnover of 8.39 lakh crore in 2000-01. At present too, NSE
has the highest turnover in India's share markets.
320. The volatility in the Indian share market is due to :
A. Inflow and outflow of foreign funds
B. Fluctuations in foreign capital markets
C. Changes in the monetary policy
The main reasons for the volatility in Indian share marare as follows:
1. Inflow and outflow of foreign funds.
2. Fluctuations in foreign capital markets.
3. Changes in monetary policy.
4. Availability of liquidity in the market.
5. Political situations.
6. Economic outlook.
7. Corporate performances etc.
321. 'Dalal Street' is situated at :
(a) New Delhi
(c) Mumbai
Ans. (c)
(b) London
(d) Paris
U.P.P.C.S. (Mains) 2'Dalal Street' is a street in downtown Mumbai, that houses
Bombay Stock Exchange (BSE). It received the name DalStreet after the Bombay Stock Exchange moved there in 187322. Terms 'Bull' and 'Bear' are associated with whbranch of commercial activity:
(a) Foreign Trade
(c) Share Market
Ans. (c)
(b) Banking
(d) Manufacturing
U.P.P.C.S. (Pre) 20M.P.P.C.S. (Pre) 19In investing world, the terms 'bull' and 'bear' are frequentlused to refer to stock market conditions. Bull market and beamarket are said to be two opposite phases in a stock markeIn a bull market, stock prices continue to rise over a perioof time, whereas in a bear market, prices continue to declinover a period of time.
The market rise can be attributed to several factors such
a positive economic outlook, strong corporate earnings, etcand vice versa in the case of a declining market.
One of the commonly accepted definitions of bull and beamarket phases is that when the stock price rises 20% or morfrom its recent low or 52-week low, it is said to have entereca bull phase. On the other hand, as and when a stock fall20% or more from its recent peak or 52-week high, it is saidto have entered a bear phase.
Economic & Social Development General Studies E-28
323. In the parlance of financial investments, the term ‘bear' 326. In the context of finance, the term ‘beta' refers to :
denotes :
(a) An investor who feels that the price of a particular
security is going to fall
(a) the process of simultaneous buying and selling of an
asset from different platforms
(b) An investor who expects the price of particular shares
to rise
(b) an investment strategy of a portfolio manager to
balance risk versus reward
(c) a type of systemic risk that arises where perfect
(c) A shareholder or a bondholder who has an interest in hedging is not possible
a company, financial or otherwise
(d) Any lender whether by making a loan or buying a
bond
Ans. (a)
(d) a numeric value that measures the fluctuations of a
stock to changes in the overall stock market
I.A.S. (Pre) 2010 Ans. (d)
Bears are the investors who expect the prices of securities
to fall and they sell the securities and buy again when the
prices actually fall.
324. Which among the following is not a speculator in the
stock exchange?
(a) Broker
(c) Bear
Ans. (a)
(b) Bull
(d) Stag
U.P. R.O./A.R.O. (Pre) 2017
U.P.P.C.S. (Mains) 2004
Speculators are the one who work with stock exchanges for
earning profit through speculations. They attempt to predict
price changes and extract profit from the price moves in an
asset in the short run.
There are 4 types of speculators in a stock exchange. They
are Bulls, Bears, Stags and Lame Ducks. Share brokers are
authorized members of the stock exchanges. They execute
trades on behalf of the customers at the exchange and charges
commission for rendering their services.
325. Insider trading is related to :
(a) Share market
(c) Тахаtion
Ans. (a)
(b) Horse racing
(d) International trade
U.P.P.C.S. (Mains) 2007
U.P.P.C.S. (Mains) 2009
U.P.P.C.S. (Mains) 2017
Insider trading is related to share market. It is the buying or
selling of a publicly traded company's stock in share market
by someone who has non-public, material information about
that stock. It is illegal when the material information is still
non-public, and this comes with stern penalties and harsh
consequences. Insider trading is an unfair and illegal practice
in the stock market, wherein other investors are at a great
disadvantage due to the lack of important insider non-public
information about a company.
Economic & Social Development
I.A.S. (Pre) 2023
In the context of finance, the term ‘beta' refers to a numeric
value that measures the fluctuations of a stock to changes
in the overall stock market. Beta (ẞ) is a measure of the
volatility- or systematic risk - of a security or portfolio
compared to the market as a whole. Beta index compares
changes in the benchmark index with the effects of stock
market variations on a particular share price. Shares with a
beta value of 1 are regarded as a generally secure investment
option, while a security that is comparatively more stable is a
low beta stock i.e. has a beta rating below 1. Equities having
a beta value larger than 1, or high beta stocks are often known
as volatile stocks. The slightest adjustment in stock market
indicators have a big influence on them.
327. Consider the following:
1. Exchange-Traded Funds (ETF)
2. Motor vehicles
3. Currency swaр
Which of the above is/are considered financial
instruments?
(a) 1 only
(c) 1, 2 and 3
Ans. (d)
(b) 2 and 3 only
(d) 1 and 3 only
I.A.S. (Pre) 2024
Financial instruments are contracts for monetary assets that
can be purchased, traded, created, modified, or settled for. In
terms of contracts, there is a contractual obligation between
involved parties during a financial instrument transaction.
Financial instruments can be real or virtual documents
representing a legal agreement involving any kind of
monetary value. Examples of financial instruments include
stocks, exchange-traded funds (ETFs), mutual funds, bonds,
derivatives contracts (such as options, futures, and swaps),
cheques, certificates of deposit (CDs), bank deposits, and
loans. Foreign exchange instruments including currency
swap is also a type of financial instrument. A currency
swap refers to the act of simultaneously buying and selling
currencies with different specified value dates. Hence,
points 1 and 3 are correct.
General Studies E-283
Point 2 is incorrect as motor vehicles are tangible physical assets.
They can be owned, brought, and sold, but they do not represent
a financial claim or contractual agreement like financial
instruments. It is to be noted that vehicle loans or leases are
financial instruments but vehicles themselves are not.
Hence, option (d) is the correct answer.
328. Capital Market means :
(a) Share market
(c) Money market
Ans. (a)
(b) Commodity market
(d) All the above
U.P.P.C.S. (Pre) 2008
Capital market is a place where buyers and sellers indulge
in trade (buying/selling) of financial securities like bonds,
stocks, etc. The trading is undertaken by participants such
as individuals and institutions. Capital market trades mostly
in long-term securities. The magnitude of a nation's capital
markets is directly interconnected to the size of its economy
which means that ripples in one corner can cause major waves
somewhere else. Capital market consists of two types i.e.
Primary and Secondary.
Primary Market : Primary market is the market for new
shares or securities. A primary market is one in which a
company issues new securities in exchange for cash from an
investor (buyer). It deals with trade of new issues of stocks
and other securities sold to the investors.
Secondary Market : Secondary market deals with the
exchange of prevailing or previously-issued securities among
investors. Once new securities have been sold in the primary
market, an efficient manner must exist for their resale.
Secondary markets give investors the means to resell/trade
existing securities. Another important division in the capital
market is made on the basis of the nature of security sold or
bought, i.e. stock market and bond market.
329. Consider the following markets:
1. Government Bond Market
2. Call Money Market
3. Treasury Bill Market
4. Stock Market
How many of the above are included in capital markets?
(a) Only one
(c) Only three
Ans. (b)
(b) Only two
(d) All four
I.A.S. (Pre) 2023
Among the given markets, Government Bond Market and
Stock Market are included in capital markets, while other
two- Call Money Market and Treasury Bill Market, are part
of money markets. Hence, option (b) is the correct answer.
330. With reference to investments, consider the following I. Bonds
III. Stocks
II. Hedge Funds
IV Venture Capital
How many of the above are treated as Alternative
Investment Funds?
(a)Only one
(c) Only three
Ans. (b)
(b) Only two
(d) All the four
I.A.S. (Pre) 2025
Alternative Investment Fund (AIF) in India is defined
under the SEBI (Securities and Exchange Board of India)
Regulations, 2012 (last amended on 19 November, 2025).
It is a privately pooled investment vehicle established or
incorporated in India, which collects funds from investors
and invests according to a defined investment policy. It is
a separate class, different from traditional mutual funds.
etc. SEBI treats bonds as debt securities. SEBI registers
hedge funds as Category III AIFs. A stock or share is a unit
of ownership in a company; it is not itself a pooled fund
structure. Therefore, a stock is not considered an Alternative
Investment Fund. Venture Capital Funds are registered as
Category I Alternative Investment Funds. Thus, only two
given investments (III and V) fall under the category of
Alternative Investment Funds (AIF).
331. With reference to the Indian economy, "Collateral
Borrowing and Lending Obligations" are the
instruments of:
(a) Bond market
(c) Money market
Ans. (c)
(b) Forex market
(d) Stock market
I.A.S. (Pre) 2024
The Clearing Corporation of India Ltd. (CCIL) has
developed and introduced with effect from January 20, 2003
a money market instrument called Collateralised Borrowing
and Lending Obligation (CBLO). CBLO represents an
obligation between a borrower and a lender concerning the
terms and conditions of a loan. The instrument works like a
bond where the lender buys the CBLO and a borrower sells
the money market instrument with interest. CBLOs allow
short-term loans to be secured by financial institutions,
helping to cover their transactions. To access these funds,
the institution must provide eligible securities as collateral
- such as Treasury Bills.
332. The most volatile partof the Organized Money Market
in India is:
(a) Government Security Market
(b) Commercial Bill Market
Economic & Social Development General Studies E-284
(c) Call Money Market
(d) Certificate of Deposit Market
Ans. (c)
R.A.S./R.T.S. (Pre) 2018
Call notice money market deals in short-term finance
repayable on demand, with a maturity period varying from
overnight to 14 days. The call/notice money market forms an
important segment of the Indian money market. Under call
money market, funds are transacted on an overnight basis
and under notice money market, funds are transacted for a
period between 2 days and 14 days. Call money market is the
most volatile part ofthe organized money market in India as
the interest rate paid on call money loans, known as the call
rate, is highly volatile. It is the most sensitive section of the
money market and the changes in the demand for and supply
of call loans are promptly reflected in call rates.
333. Which of the following is not a participant in the India's
money market:
(a) IDBI
(b) ICICI
(c) Money Market Mutual Funds
(d) RBI
Ans. (d)
U.P.P.C.S. (Pre) 1999
Money market is an integral part of the financial system
and includes instruments that provide short-term funds with
maturity ranging from overnight to one year. Money market
generally includes short-term unsecured (uncollateralised)
interbank loans, secure (collateralised) loans (including
repurchase agreements), treasury bills (T-bills), commercial
papers (CPs), and certificates of deposit (CDs). Participants
in India's money market currently include commercial banks,
co-operative banks, PDs (Primary Dealers), development
finance institutions, insurance companies, mutual funds,
NBFCs, corporates, etc. RBI is not a participant in the India's
money market. The RBI undertakes monetary operation under the Liquidity Adjustment Facility (LAF) etc. and manages
liquidity in the banking system.
334. With reference to the Indian economy, consider the
following statements:
1. 'Commercial Paper' is a short-term unsecured
promissory note.
2. 'Certificate of Deposit' is a long-term instrument
issued by the Reserve Bank of India to a corporation.
3. 'Call Money’ is a short-term finance used for interbank transactions.
4. 'Zero-Coupon Bonds’ are the interest bearing shortterm bonds issued by the Scheduled Commercial
Banks to corporations.
Which of the statements given above is/are correct?
(a) 1 and 2 only
(c) 1 and 3 only
Ans. (c)
(b) 4 only
(d) 2, 3 and 4 only
I.A.S. (Pre) 2020
'Commercial Paper (CP)’ is an unsecured money
market instrument issued in the form of a promissory
note. Corporates, Primary Dealers (PDs) and the All-India
Financial Institutions (FIs) are eligible to issue CP. CP can
be issued for maturities between a minimum of 7 days and
a maximum of up to one year from the date of issue (shortterm). Hence, statement (1) is correct.
'Certificate of Deposit (CD)' is a negotiable money market
instrument and issued in dematerialised form out as a
Usance Promissory Note, against funds deposited in a bank
or other eligible financial institutions for a specified time
period. Guidelines for issue of CDs are governed by the
Reserve Bank of India. CDs can be issued by (i) Scheduled
Commercial Banks excluding Regional Rural Banks (RRBs)
and Local Area Banks (LABs); and (ii) Select all-India
Financial Institutions that have been permitted by RBI to
raise short-term resources within the umbrella limit fixed by
RBI. Hence, statement (2) is incorrect.
'Call Money' is the borrowing or lending of funds for 1
day (overnight). Participants in call money market includes
banks (excluding RRBs) and Primary Dealers (PDs), both
as borrowers and lenders. Participants are force to decide
on interest rate in call money market. It is short period
borrowing and lending to meet the short term mismatches
in fund position. Hence, statement (3) is correct.
'Zero-coupon Bond' is a debt security that does not pay
interest but instead trades at a deep discount, rendering a
profit at maturity, when the bond is redeemed for its full face
value. Hence, statement (4) is incorrect.
335. For which, commercial paper is the source of credit?
(a) Commercial Bank (b) Corporate Industry
(c) Small scale Industry (d) Foreign Bank
Ans. (b)
U.P.P.C.S. (Mains) 2004
Commercial paper (CP) is source of credit for corporate
industry. It was introduced in 1990 in India. Commercial
paper is an unsecured money market instrument issued in
the form of promissory note. CP can be issued for maturities
between a minimum 7 days and a maximum of upto one year
from the date of issue.
Economic & Social Development General Studies E-285
336. With reference to Convertible Bonds, consider the
following statements:
1. As there is an option to exchange the bond for equity,
Convertible Bonds pay a lower rate of interest.
2. The option to convert to equity affords the bondholder
a degree of indexation to rising consumer prices.
Which of the statements given above is/are correct?
(a) 1 only
(c) Both 1 and 2
Ans. (c)
(b) 2 only
(d) Neither 1 nor 2
I.A.S. (Pre) 2022
A Convertible Bond is a fixed-income corporate debt security
that yields interest payments, but can be converted into a
prędetermined number of common stock or equity shares. A
Convertible Bond offers investors a type of hybrid security
that has features of a bond, such as interest payments, while
also having the option to own the underlying stock. However,
Convertible Bonds tend to offer a lower rate of interest (lower
coupon rate) in exchange for the value of the option to convert
the bond into common stock. Hence, statement 1 is correct.
The option to convert to equity affords the bondholder a degree of indexation to rising consumer prices as equity prices
can differ widely from the given interest and the difference in
that can be used as hedge for the inflation. Hence, statement
2 is also correct.
337. In India, which of the following can trade in Corporate
Bonds and Government Securities?
1. Insurance Companies
3. Retail Investors
2. Pension Funds
Select the correct answer using the code given below:
(a) 1 and 2 only
(c) 1 and 3 only
Ans. (d)
(b) 2 and 3 only
(d) 1, 2 and 3
I.A.S. (Pre) 2024
Corporate bonds are debt instruments issued by companies
to raise funds for various purposes like expansion, project
financing, and working capital etc. Institutional investors
like mutual funds, insurance companies, and pension funds
| are major players in corporate bonds market. Retail investors
can also invest through brokers and online platforms.
Government Securities (G-Secs) are tradeable instruments
issued by the Central or State Governments to acknowledge
their debt obligations. Institutional investors like banks,
insurance companies, and pension funds are major holders
of G-Secs, but retail investors can also participate through
platforms like RBI Retail Direct.
338. Consider the following statements :
Statement I : As regards returns from an investment
in a company, generally, bondholders are considered
to be relatively at lower risk than stockholders.
Statement II : Bondholders are lenders to a company
whereas stockholders are its owners.
Statement III : For repayment purpose, bondholders
are prioritized over stockholders by a company
Which one of the following is correct in respect of the
above statements?
(a) Both Statement II and Statement III are correct and
both of them explain Statement I
(b) Both Statement I and Statement II are correct and
Statement I explains Statement II
(c) Only one of the Statements II and III is correct and
that explains Statement I
(d) Neither Statement II nor Statement III is correct
Ans. (a)
I.A.S. (Pre) 2025
In the context of returns from investing in a company,
bondholders are generallyconsidered to have lower risk than
shareholders. This is because bondholders usually have a
contractual right to receive fixed interest and repayment of the
principal amount at maturity, whereas shareholders' returns
depend on dividends and fluctuations in share prices, which
are uncertain and riskier. A person who buys bonds lends
money to the company; in return, they have a contractual
right to interest and repayment of principal, but they do not
receive ownership rights. On the other hand, a person who
buys shares becomes a participant in the company's equity
capital and is regarded as a part-owner of the company, whose
claim is on dividends and residual profits. For the purpose
of repayment, the company gives priority to bondholders
over shareholders. Thus, both Statement II and Statement III
are correct, and together they logically explain Statement I.
339. Indian Government Bond Yields are influenced
which of the following?
1. Actions of the United States Federal Reserve
2. Actions of the Reserve Bank of India
3. Inflation and short-term interest rates
by
Select the correct answer using the code given below:
(a) 1 and 2 only
(b) 2 only
(c) 3 only
(d) 1, 2 and 3
I.A.S. (Pre) 2021
Hence, option (d) is the correct answer. Ans. (d)
General Studies
E-286
A bond is a debt instrument in which an investor loans money
to an entity (typically corporate or government) which borrows the funds for a defined period of time at a variable or
fixed interest rate. Bond yield is the return an investor gets on
that bond or on a particular government security. The major
factors affecting the bond yield are the monetary policy of
the Reserve Bank of India, especially the course of interest
rates, the fiscal position of the government and its borrowing
programme, global markets (which are affected by the actions
of the U.S. Federal Reserve), economy, and inflation. Hence,
all the given statements are correct.
340. With reference to the Indian economy, what are the
advantages of 'Inflation-Indexed Bonds (IIBs)’?
1. Government can reduce the coupon rates on its
borrowing by way of IIBs.
2. IIBs provide protection to the investors from
uncertainty regarding inflation.
3. The interest received as well as capital gains on
IIBs are not taxable.
Which of the statements given above are correct?
(a) 1 and 2 only
(c) 1 and 3 only
Ans. (a)
(b) 2 and 3 only
(d) 1, 2 and 3
I.A.S. (Pre) 2022
Inflation-Indexed Bonds (IIBs) are financial instruments
that attempt to protect the bonds' purchasing power by tying
interest and principal payments to an index of price changes.
IIBs include two types of compensation, a real rate of return
plus a compensation for the erosion of purchasing power due
to inflation. IIBs provide insurance to investors from inflation
and cost savings for the Government on account of reduction
in coupon payments with lowering inflation rate, elimination
of uncertainty risk premium, and containing inflationary
expectations. Hence, statements 1 and 2 are correct.
As per RBI, extant tax provisions will be applicable on
interest payment and capital gains on IIBs and there will be
no special tax treatment for these bonds. Hence, statement
3 is incorrect.
341. Consider the following statements :
1. India accounts for a very large portion of all equity
option contracts traded globally thus exhibiting a
great booт.
II. India's stock market has grown rapidly in the
recent past even overtaking Hong Kong's at some
point of time.
III. There is no regulatory body either to warn the
small investors about the risks of options trading
or to act on unregistered financial advisors in this
regard.
Which of the statements given above are correct?
(a) I and II only (b) II and III only
(c) I and III only
Ans. (a)
(d) I, II and III
I.A.S. (Pre) 2025
In 2023, the number of equity index option contracts traded
on Indian exchanges was about 84.3 billion, whereas the
total option contracts worldwide were about 108.2 billion.
From this, it follows that in 2023, around 78% of global
option contracts (based on the above figures) were traded
in India- i.e., a 'very large share' actually came from India
itself. In April 2025 as well, India was contributing about
60% of global equity derivatives trading volume, and the
FIA still considered it the world's largest derivatives market.
In January 2024, the size of India's stock market (combined
market cap of BSE and NSE) reached about USD 4.33 trillion,
while at the same time Hong Kong's market cap was about
USD 4.29 trillion. Thus, India overtook Hong Kong on the
basis of market capitalization and achieved the position of the
world's 4th-largest equity market. During 2024-25, India and
Hong Kong's ranking moved between the 4th-5th positions
at different points in time. SEBI (Securities and Exchange
Board of India) is the statutory regulatory body for India's
securities market and the commodity derivatives segment. It
was established under the SEBI Act, 1992, and its objective
is to protect investors' interests and regulate the securities
market. Thus, an active regulatory body exists. Therefore,
the correct answer is option (a), i.e., only I and II.
342. According to a CRISIL Ratings report, how much is the
corporate bond market expected to grow by Financial
Year 2030 in India?
(a) Rs. 100-120 lakh crore
(b) Rs. 50-70 lakh crore
(c) Rs. 120-150 lakh crore
(d) Rs. 70-90 lakh crore
Ans. (a)
70th B.P.S.C. (Pre) 2024
As per the CRISIL Ratings report released in December,
2024, after clocking a compound annual growth rate (CAGR)
of~9% over the past five fiscals, the Indian corporate bond
market appears set for even faster growth. Crisil Ratings
expects outstanding size of Indian corporate bond market to
more than double from ~ Rs. 43 lakh crore as of last fiscal
to Rs. 100-120 lakh crore by fiscal 2030.
eneral Studies
E-287
343. Blue Chip means :
(a) Shares guaranted by the governments.
(b) Shares listed in the Stock Exchange.
(c) Shares giving consistent high rate of return.
(d) None of these.
Ans. (c)
U.P.P.C.S. (Mains) 2008
A Blue Chip stock is the stock of a huge company with an
excellent reputation. They are typically large, wellestablished
and financially sound companies that have operated for
many years and that have dependable earnings, often paying
dividends to their investors. These shares give consistently
high rate of return to their investors.
344. Sweat Equity shares are issued to which ofthe following?
(a) Ordinary Shareholders
(b) Preference Shareholders
(c) Both (a) and (b)
(d) Employees of the company
Ans. (d)
Gilt-edged securities are the Government securities (G-secs
traded in the stock exchange. They are called gilt-edgedbecause it is certain that interest will be paid and they will be redeemed on the due date.
346. Which of the following are called gilt-edged securities?(a) Shares of Public Limited Companies
(b) Government Securities
(c) Shares of Private Limited Companies
(d) Stocks of Mutual Funds
Ans. (b)
Uttarakhand P.C.S. (Pre) 2021| See the explanation of above question.
347. Which one of the following is irrelevant in the contextof share market?
(a) Sensex
(c) Nifty
Uttarakhand P.C.S. (Pre) 2021
Ans. (d)
Sweat Equity shares means such equity shares as are issued
by the company to its directors or employees at a discount or
for consideration, other than cash, for providing their knowhow or making available rights in the nature of intellectual
property rights or value additions, by whatever name called.
Sweat Equity shares is a reward given to the employees for
their contribution towards fulfilling the objectives of the
company. It encourages the employee to work more for
the development of the company. For issue of sweat equity
shares, the listed company shall comply with the provisions
of Securities and Exchange Board of India (SEBI) Regulations on Sweat Equity and the company other than listed
company shall comply with the provisions of Section 54 of
the Companies Act, 2013 and Rule 8 of Companies (Share
Capital and Debentures) Rules, 2014.
345. Gilt-edged market means :
(a) bullion market
(b) market of Government securities
(c) market of guns
(d) market of pure metals
(b) B.S.E.
(d) SAPs
M.P.P.C.S. (Pre) 2016U.P.P.C.S. (Pre) 2005
Sensex, B.S.E. and Nifty are related to share market, while
'Structural Adjustment Programmes' (SAPs) are economic
policies for developing countries that have been promoted by
the World Bank and IMF by the provision of loans conditional
on the adoption of such policies.
348. What is 'NIKKEI'?
(a) Foreign Exchange Market of Japan.
(b) Japanese name of country's Planning Commission.
(c) Name of Japanese Central Bank.
(d) Share Price Index in Tokyo Stock Exchange.
Ans. (d)
U.P.P.C.S. (Mains) 2008
'NIKKEI' (Nikkei 225) is a share price (stock market) index
for the Tokyo Stock Exchange.
349. What does S & P 500 relate to?
(a) Supercomputer
(b) A new technique in e-business
(c) A new technique in bridge building
(d) An index of stocks of large companies
I.A.S. (Pre) 2000
Ans. (d) U.P.P.C.S. (Pre) 2002, 2008
U.P. Lower Sub. (Pre) 2002
U.P.P.C.S. (Mains) 2004
I.A.S. (Pre) 2008
The S&P 500 or the Standard and Poor 500 index, is a
market-capitalization-weighted index of the 500 leading
Ans. (b) publicly-traded companies in the United States.
Economic & Social Development General Studies E-288
350. Which of the following pairs are correctly matched ?
1. Dow Jones
2. Hang Seng
3. FTSE-100
(a) 1, 2 and 3
(c) 1 and 2
New York
Seoul
London
(b) 2 and 3
(d) 1 and 3
Ans. (d)
I.A.S. (Pre) 1998
The correctly matched pairs are as follows:
Stock Exchange Index City
1. Dow Jones New York
2. Hang Seng Hong Kong
3. FTSE-100 London
4. KOSPI Seoul
Hence, option (d) is the correct answer.
351. Which one of the following pairs is not correctly
matched?
(a) Japan Nikkei
(b) Singapore Shcomp
(c) U.K. FTSE
(d) U.S.A. Nasdaq
I.A.S. (Pre) 2009
Ans. (b)
The correctly matched pairs are as follows:
Country
U.S.A.
Japan
U.K.
Singapore
Stock Exchange Index
Nasdaq
Nikkei
FTSE
STI
Shcomp (Shanghai Stock Exchange Composite Index) is the
index of Shanghai share market.
352. Which of the following is related to Brent Index?
(a) Crude oil prices
(b) Copper future prices
(c) Gold future prices
(d) Shipping rate index
Ans. (a)
U.P. R.O./A.R.O. (Pre) 2021
Brent Index is related to crude oil prices. It may refer to any
or all of the components of the Brent Complex, a physically
and financially traded oil market based around the North Sea
of Northwest Europe. Hence, option (a) is the correct answer.
353. Which one of the following four countries economy
has market-cap more than the size of its GDP?
(c) China (d) Japan
U.P.P.C.S. (Mains) 2009
Ans. (*)
As per the question period, option (b) was the correct answer
Market capitalization of Indian companies in 2007 exceed
ed its GDP (Gross Domestic Product) level. It reached an
all-time high of 146.4% of GDP in December, 2007 and a
record low of 23.0% in December, 2001. As per the CEIC
Data, India's market capitalization accounted for 137.7%
of its Nominal GDP in December, 2025, compared with a
percentage of 138.9% in the previous year. At present, Japan
(179.8% in December, 2025) and U.S.A. (Approx. 220% in
December, 2025) also have market capitalization more than
the size of their nominal GDP.
354. A company declares dividend on
(a) Issued Capital
(b) Authorized Capital
(c) Subscribed Capital
(d) Total Employed Capital
Ans. (c)
U.P.P.C.S. (Pre) 1996
Company issues dividends on subscribed capital because
subscribed capital is that part of issued capital which is
purchased by shareholders. Dividend means the portion of
the profit received by the shareholders from the company's
net profit. Therefore, dividend is a return on the share capital
subscribed for and paid to its shareholders by a company.
355. Debenture holders of a company are its :
(a) shareholders
(c) debtors
Ans. (b)
(b) creditors
(d) directors
I.A.S. (Pre) 2003
A debenture is a medium to long-term debt instrument
used by large companies to borrow money, at a fixed rate
of interest. A debenture is like a certificate of loan or a loan
bond evidencing the fact that the company is liable to pay
a specified amount with interest. Public limited company
issues the debenture under the Company Act, 1956 and it is
under the guidelines of the SBI. Hence, debenture holders
of a company are its creditors.
356. Which one of the following is different from the others
from the point of view of ownership?
(a) LIC Policy
(b) Bank Fixed Deposit (a) U.S.А. (b) India
Economic & Social Development General Studies E-289
(c) Kisan Vikas Patra
(d) Debenture of a Company
Ans. (d)
U.P.P.C.S (Pre) 2011
Debentures are freely transferable by the debenture holder
by the company's agreement, while LIC Policy, Bank FD
and Kisan Vikas Patra have fixed ownership, which cannot
be changed.
357. From the balance sheet of a company, it is possible to :
(a) judge the extent of profitability of the company
(b) assess the profitability and size of the company
(c) determine the size and composition of the assets and
liabilities of the company
(d) determine the market share, debts and assets of the
company
Ans. (c)
I.A.S. (Pre) 1999
Balance sheet is a snapshot of a company's financial condition
at a specific time, usually at the close of an accounting period.
A company's balance sheet comprises its assets (e.g. cash,
inventory etc.), liabilities (e.g. debt, accounts payable etc.)
and equity (e.g. share capital, retained earnings, reserves, etc.).
358. The first Land Development Bank was established in
1920. It was located in :
(a) Meerut
(c) Munger
Ans. (b)
(b) Jhang
(d) Thane
U.P. P.C.S. (Mains) 2016
The first Land Development Bank (LDB) was set up at
Jhang in Punjab in 1920. The main objective of the LDB is
to promote the development of land, agriculture and increase
the agricultural production. The LDB provides long-term
finances to members directly through its branches.
359. Land Development Bank provides loan to farmers for:
(a) Short term
(c) Long term
Ans. (c)
(b) Medium term
(d) Only for land improvement
R.A.S./R.T.S. (Pre) 1999
The Land Development Bank provides long-term loans
for the development of land and increasing the agricultural
production.
360. Which of the functions of Land Development Bank
is correct?
(a) Providing long term loan to farmers
(b) Providing short term loan to farmers
Economic & Social Development
(c) Providing loans to large industries
(d) Providing loans to small scale industries
Ans. (a)
See the explanation of above question.
U.P.P.C.S. (Pre) 1992361. Which one of the following banks gives Long termloans to Agriculture ?
(a) State Cooperative Bank
(b) Commercial Bank
(c) Primary Credit Society
(d) Land Development Bank
Ans. (d)
U.P.P.C.S. (Mains) 2008See the explanation of above question.
362. Land Development Banks is a part of :
(a) Commercial Banks
(b) IDBI
(c) FCI
(d) Cooperative Credit Structure
Ans. (d)
U.P.P.C.S. (Mains) 2008Land Development Bank is a part of cooperative creditstructure. It is of quasi-commercial type. The StateCooperative Banks, Cooperative Land Development Banksand Primary Agricultural Credit Societies come under thecooperative credit structure.
363. Central Cooperative Banks work at :
(a) District level
(b) State level
(c) National level
(d) Block level
Ans. (a)
U.P.P.C.S. (Mains) 2004In India, Cooperative Banks operate with a three tier system.Primary Agricultural Credit Societies (PACS) at the villagelevel, Central Cooperative Banks (CCBs) at the district leveland State Cooperative Banks (St.CBs) at the state level.
364. Structure of Cooperative credit societies is :
(a) Single tiered
(c) Three tiered
Ans. (c)
(b) Double tiered
(d) Four tiered
R.A.S./R.T.S. (Pre) 1994See the explanation of above question.
General Studies E-290
365.Which of the following operates at the district level ?
(a) State Cooperative Bank
(b) Central Cooperative Bank
(c) Primary Agricultural Credit Society
(d) The RBI
Ans. (b)
U.P.P.C.S. (Spl.) (Mains) 2008
See the explanation of above question.
366. With reference to ‘Urban Cooperative Banks' in India,
consider the following statements :
1. They are supervised and regulated by local boards
set up by the State Governments.
2. They can issue equity shares and preference shares.
3. They were brought under the purview of the
Banking Regulation Act, 1949 through an
Amendment in 1966.
Which of the statements given above is/are correct?
(a) 1 only
(c) 1 and 3 only
Ans. (b)
(b) 2 and 3 only
(d) 1, 2 and 3
I.A.S. (Pre) 2021
Urban Cooperative Banks (UCBs) refer to primary cooperative banks located in Urban and semi-urban areas. UCBs are
regulated and supervised by State Registrars of Cooperative
Societies (RCS) in case of single-state cooperative banks and
Central Registrar of Cooperative Societies (CRCS) in case
of multi-state cooperative banks and by the RBI.
Large cooperative banks with paid-up share capital and reserves of Rs. 1 lakh were brought under the purview of the
Banking Regulation Act, 1949 with effect from 1t March
1966, (through an amendment in the Act), and within the
ambit of the Reserve Bank's supervision. This marked the
beginning of an era of duality of control over these banks.
Banking related functions (viz. licensing, area of operations,
interest rates, etc.) were to be governed by RBI while registration, management, audit and liquidation, etc. were governed
by State Governments through Registrars of Cooperative
Societies as per the provisions of respective State Acts.
Recently, the Banking Regulation (Amendment) Act, 2020,
came into force with effect from June 29, 2020 for Primary
(Urban) Cooperative Banks. The BR (Amendment) Act expanded the RBI's regulatory control over cooperative banks
in terms of management, capital, audit and liquidation, etc.
Hence, statement 1 is incorrect while statement 3 is correct.
As per BR (Amendment) Act, 2020, a cooperative bank may
issue equity shares, preference shares or special shares on
face value or at a premium to its members or to any other
person residing within its area of operation. However, such
issuance will be subject to the prior approval of the RBI, and
any other conditions as may be specified by the RBI. Hence,
statement 2 is correct.
Economic & Social Development
367. As on March 2012, the number of Urban Cooperative
Banks in India was:
(a) 65
(c) 1645
Ans. (*)
(b) 164
(d) 6540
U.P.P.C.S. (Mains) 2012
At end-March 2012, the number of Urban Cooperative
Banks (UCBs) in India was 1618, while at end-March
2011,the number of UCBs in India was 1645. At end-March,
2023 the total number of UCBs in India was 1502. As per
the data of 31 March, 2025, the total number of UCBs is
reduced to 1457.
368. Consumer Cooperative Stores are set up by:
(a) by the members
(b) by the Registrar of Cooperative Societies
(c) by the Central Government
(d) by the State Government
Ans. (a)
U.P. R.O./A.R.O. (Pre) 2016
Consumer Cooperative Stores are set up by the members,
while they are registered by the Registrar of Cooperative
societies.
369. Which one of the following is not a source of direct
finance?
(a) NABARD
(b) Regional Rural Bank
(c) State Bank of India
(d) Allahabad Bank
(e) None of the above/More than one of the above
Ans. (e)
65th B.P.S.C. (Pre) 2019
All of the above given institutions are sources of direct
finance. NABARD does not provide direct finance to
individuals, but it provides direct finance to food parks,
warehouses, cold chains and storages, marketing federations
etc. while RRBs, SBI and Allahabad Bank provide direct
finance to individuals as well as industries and other sectors.
370. During which Plan Period was the National Bank
for Agriculture and Rural Development (NABARD)
established?
(a) Third Five Year Plan
(c) Sixth Five Year Plan
Ans. (c)
General Studies
(b) Fifth Five Year Plan
(d) Eighth Five Year Plan
47th B.P.S.C. (Pre) 2005
E-291
NABARD (National Bank for Agriculture and Rural
Development) was established during the Sixth Five Year Plan
in July, 1982. Its headquarter is located in Mumbai. It is the
apex institution for providing agricultural refinance in India.
NABARD promotes sustainable and equitable agriculture
and rural development through participative financial and
non-financial interventions, innovations, technology and
institutional development for securing and fostering rural
prosperity. It provides refinance to Scheduled Commercial
Banks, Regional Rural Banks and State Land Development
Banks etc. for agriculture and rural development.
371. The apex bank for providing agricultural refinance in
India is :
(a) RBI
(c) SBI
(b) NABARD
(d) Imperial Bank
(e) None of the above/More than one of the above
Ans. (b)
63rd B.P.S.C. (Pre) 2017
See the explanation of above question.
372. The apex bank for providing agricultural refinance in
India is :
(a) RBI
(c) LDB
Ans. (b)
(b) NABARD
(d) SBI
Uttrakhand P.C.S. (Pre) 2016
See the explanation of above question.
373. The ‘National Bank for Agriculture and Rural Development' was set up in the year :
(a) 1992
(c) 1962
See the explanation of above question
376. Only organization to cater to all types of credit
requirements of agriculture and rural developmentactivities, is:
(a) RBI
(c) ARDС
Ans. (b)
(b) NABARD
(d) NAFED
R.A.S./R.T.S. (Pre) 1994
National Bank for Agriculture and Rural Development
(NABARD) is the apex institution to provide finance for
agriculture and rural development. It was established on
12 July, 1982 through Act 61 of 1981 of the Parliament.
Its headquarters is located in Mumbai. NABARD as the
apex institution provides refinance assistance to different
financial institutions (like State Co-operative Banks, State
Land Development Banks, Regional Rural Banks etc.) for
promoting agriculture and rural development activities.
377. When was the NABARD established?
(a) 15th August, 1947
(c) 12th July, 1982
Ans. (c)
(b) 1 April, 1951
(d) 26th January, 1950
M.P. P.C.S. (Pre) 2023
See the explanation of above question.
378. Consider the following statements with reference to
NABARD :
1. NABARD was established in 1982 by the act of
Parliament.
2. It provide facility of credit only for the agriculture.
Among these -
(a) Only 1 is correct
(b) 1982
(d) 1952
U.P.P.C.S. (Mains) 2003
M.P.P.C.S. (Pre) 2006 (b) Only 2 is correct
Ans. (b) (c) 1 and 2 both are correct
(d) Neither 1 nor 2 is correct
See the explanation of above question. U.P.R.O./A.R.O. (Pre) 2016
374. NABARD came into existence in the year : Ans. (a)
(a) 1979
(c) 1981
Ans. (d)
See the explanation of above question.
(b) 1980
(d) 1982
U.P. P.C.S. (Mains) 2014
See the explanation of above question.
375. Which of the following is the Headquarter of NABARD?
(a) New Delhi
(c) Mumbai
(b) Chennai
(d) Jaipur
Uttrakhand U.D.A./L.D.A. (Mains) 2007
379. NABARD prodives refinance:
(a) For agriculture and rural development
(b) For Export business
(c) For Industrial Development
(d) All the above
U.P.P.C.S. (Spl.) (Mains) 2004r
Ans. (a)
Ans. (c) See the explanation of above question.
Economic & Social Development General Studies E-292
380. The Apex Institution to finance agriculture credit in
India is:
(a) Reserve Bank of India
(b) NABARD
(c) Cooperative Societies
(d) Government of India
Ans. (b)
See the explanation of above question.
U.P.P.C.S. (Pre) 2005
381. The Apex Institution in the sphere of Agriculture
Credit is :
(a) State Bank of India
(b) Reserve Bank of India
(c) NABARD
(d) Regional Rural Banks
Ans. (c)
U.P. Lower Sub. (Spl.) (Pre) 2004
See the explanation of above question.
382. The Apex bank of agriculture sector is :
(a) Punjab National Bank
(b) State Bank of India
(c) NABARD
(d) Central Bank of India
Ans. (c)
U.P.R.O./A.R.O. (Mains) 2014
See the explanation of above question.
383. In relation to Agricultural Finance and Refinance
which institution is the biggest?
(a) Regional Rural Banks
(b) NABARD
(c) Central Cooperative Bank
(d) Land Development Bank
Ans. (b)
U.P.P.C.S. (Mains) 2014
See the explanation of above question.
384. NABARD is related to :
(a) National Institute of Agricultural Development
(b) National Institute of Rural Development
(c) National Bank for Agriculture and Rural Development
(d) National Financial Institution
Ans. (c)
See the explanation of above question.
M.P.P.C.S. (Pre) 2015
385. In India, the Bank NABARD does not provide refinance
to:
(a) Scheduled Commercial Banks
(b) Regional Rural Banks
(c) Export-Import Bank
(d) State Land Development Banks
Ans. (c)
U.P.P.C.S. (Mains) 2002
National Bank for Agriculture and Rural Development
|(NABARD) was established in 1982. It provides refinance
to Scheduled Commercial Banks, Regional Rural Banks
(RRBs) and State Land Development Banks. NABARD does
not provide refinance to Export-Import Bank.
386. The nodal agency for implementing the ‘Rural
Infrastructure Development Fund Programmes' is:
(a) NABARD
(b) State Co-operative Bank
(c) Reserve Bank of India
(d) State Bank of India
U.P.P.C.S. (Spl.) (Mains) 2008
U.P.P.C.S. (Mains) 2004, 2009
Ans. (a)
NABARD is the nodal agency for implementing the 'Rural
Infrastructure Development Fund Programmes'. The Rural
Infrastructure Development Fund (RIDF) was created in
1995-96 in NABARD, with an initial corpus of Rs. 2000
crore. NABARD releases the sanctioned amount for 39 eligible activities under RIDF on reimbursement basis except
for the initial mobilisation advance @ 30% to North Eastern
& Hilly States and 20% for the other States. With the allocation of Rs. 40,475 crore for 2023-24 under RIDF XXIX,
the cumulative allocation has reached Rs. 4,98,411 crore,
including Rs. 18,500 crore under Bharat Nirman.
387. When was the first Regional Rural Bank formed?
(a) 1977
(c) 1974
Ans. (d)
(b) 1976
(d) 1975
M.P.P.C.S. (Pre) 2012
The first Regional Rural Bank 'Prathama Grameen Bank
was set up at Moradabad (U.P.) on 2nd October, 1975. Out of
five initial stage RRBs in the country, remaining four were
set up at Malda (West Bangal), Gorakhpur (U.P.), Bhiwani
(Haryana) and Jaipur (Rajasthan).
388. In India, Regional Rural Banks were established in the
year:
(a) 1969
Economic & Social Development General Studies
(b) 1975
E-293
(c) 1980 (d) 1982
Ans. (b)
U.P.P.C.S. (Mains) 2010
See the explanation of above question.
389. Which one of the following is not the function
Regional Rural Banks?
of
(a) To provide credit to small and marginal farmers
(b) To provide credit to common people in rural areas.
(c) To supplement Scheduled Commercial Banks
(d) To take over the functions of Agricultural Refinance
Corporation of India.
Ans. (d)
U.P.P.C.S. (Mains) 2005
Taking over the function of Agricultural Refinance
Corporation of India is not the function of the Regional Rural
Banks, while rest are the functions of RRBs.
390. In March, 2025, the Indian Government announced
the merger of how many Regional Rural Banks (RRBs)
under the ‘one state, one RRB’ initiative ?
(a) 15 (b) 20
Land Development Banks have been established in India
to provide long term loans to rural households for land de
velopment. Since other banks are not able to provide long
term loans for buying agnicultural machinery and maki
permanent changes in the land, LDBs were set up to fuls
this purpose
392. Consider the following events and arrange them
chronological order :
1. Establishment of NABARD
2. Self Help Group Bank Linkage Programme
3. Kisan Credit Card Plan
4. Establishment of Regional Rural Bank
Select the correct answer from the codes given below
Codes:
(a) 4, 1, 2, 3 (b) 4, 2, 3, 1
(c) 1, 2, 3, 4, (d) 4, 3. 2,1
U.P.P.C.S. (Pre) 2020Ans. (a)
Events Year
Establishment of NABARD 1982
(d) 30 Self Help Group Bank Linkage Programme 1992-93
Uttarakhand P.C.S. (Pre) 2025 Kisan Credit Card Plan 1998
Establishment of Regional Rural Bank 1975
(c) 26
Ans. (c)
In April 2025, the Government of India notified the
amalgamation of a total of 26 Regional Rural Banks under
the 'One State One RRB' principle. The objective of this
consolidation is to improve the operational capacity and
efficiency of rural banks and to strengthen financial inclusion.
391. Which of the following grants/grant direct credit
assistance to rural household?
1. Regional Rural Banks
2. National Bank for Agriculture and Rural Development
3. Land Development Banks
Select the correct answer using the codes given below
(a) 1 and 2 only
(c) land 3 only
Ans. (c)
(b) 2 only
(d) 1, 2 and 3
I.A.S. (Pre) 2013
NABARD does not give direct credit assistance to rural
households. It refinances the asistance given by other institutions. Regional Rural Banks (RRBs) also known as Grameen
Banks provide banking and financial services in rural areas.
The main purpose of RRBs is to mobilise financial resources
in rural and semi-urban areas and grant loans and advances
mostly to small and marginal farmers, agricultural labourers
and rural artisans
Economic & Social Development
Hence, the correct chronological order is given in option (1
393. Which of the following does not implement the Sel
Help Groups (SHGs) – Bank Linkage Programme?
(a) NABARD
(b) Commercial Banks
(c) RRBs
(d) Cooperative Banks
Ans. (a)
U.P.P.C.S. (Pre) ( Re-Exam)2015Self Help Groups (SHGs) – Bank Linkage Programme w
started by the NABARD in 1992-93 with an aim to provi
financial services to the unreached and underserved poorhouseholds by linking the SHGs of poor to the formal financa
institutions. The programme is implemented by CommercaBanks,Regional Rural Banks (RRBS) and Cooperative Banis
|NABARD does not implement this programme
394. Consider the following statements:
1. The Self-Help Group (SHG) programme w
originally initiated by the State Bank of India
providing microcredit to the financially deprived2. Inan SHG, all members of a group take responsiди
General Studies
for a loan that an individual member takes
</user_query>

3. The Regional Rural Banks and Scheduled Commercial Banks support SHGs.
How many of the above statements are correct?
(a) Only one
(c) All three
Ans. (b)
(b) Only two
(d) None
I.A.S. (Pre) 2023
The Self-Help Group (SHG) programme was originally
initiated in India by the NABARD. Based on the observations
of various research studies and an action research project
carried out by NABARD, the model of Self Help GroupBank Linkage Programme (SHG-BLP) has evolved as a
cost-effective mechanism for providing financial services to
the unreached and underserved poor households. What started
as a pilot to link around 500 SHGs of poor to the formal
financial institutions during the year 1992-93 has now become
the largest microfinance programme in the world, in terms of
the client base and outreach. In an SHG, naturally all members
become equally responsible for the loan amount sanctioned.
If a member fails to repay the loan, all other remaining
members should take the responsibility of repayment. Since
the decisions are taken collectively, all members will take up
the responsibility of recovering the loans. The Regional Rural
Banks and Scheduled Commercial Banks are key financing
institutions to support SHGs. Hence, statement 1 is incorrect,
while other two statements are correct.
395. Bhandari Committee is related to :
(a) Direct taxation
(b) Indirect taxation
(c) Agriculture credit
(d) Regional Rural Banks'restructuring
(e) None of the above / More than one of the above
67th B.P.S.C. (Pre) (Re-Exam) 2022
Ans. (d)
The Committee on Restructuring of Regional Rural Banks
(RRBs), 1994 (Bhandari Committee) identified 49 RRBs
for comprehensive restructuring. It recommended greater
devolution of decision-making powers to the Boards of RRBs
in the matters of business development and staff matters.
396. The Narasimham Committee for Financial Sector
Reforms has suggested reduction in :
(a) SLR and CRR
(b) SLR, CRR and Priority Sector Financing
(c) SLR and Financing to Capital Goods Sector
(d) CRR, Priority Sector Financing and Financing to
Capital Goods Sector
Two expert Committees were set up in 1990s under the
|Chairmanship of M. Narasimham (an ex-RBI Governor)
which are widely credited for spearheading the financial
sector reforms in India. The first Narasimham Committee
(Committee on the Financial System -CFS) was constituted
in 1991 and the second one (Committee on Banking Sector
Reforms) was appointed in 1997. These two committees
submitted their reports in 1991 and 1998 respectively. The
Narasimham Committee I for Financial Sector Reforms had
suggested reduction in Statutory Liquidity Ratio and Cash
Reserve Ratio. The Committee was of the view that the
reduction ofthe prempted portion of banks' resources through
the SLR and CRR would, in any case, enlarge the abilities
of banks to dispense credit to priority sectors.
397. Narasimham Committee was related to:
(a) Higher Education Reforms
(b) Tax Structure Reforms
(c) Banking Structure Reforms
(d) Planning implementation reforms
Ans. (c)
R.A.S./R.T.S. (Pre) 1992
M.P.P.C.S. (Pre) 1993
U.P. Lower Sub. (Pre) 2008
Uttarakhand P.C.S. (Pre) 2006
Uttarakhand U.D.A./L.D.A. (Mains) 2006
See the explanation of above question.
398. Which of the following committees examined and
suggested Financial Sector reforms?
(a) Abid Hussain Committee
(b) Bhagwati Committee
(c) Chelliah Committee
(d) Narasimham Committee
Ans. (d)
See the explanation of above question.
I.A.S. (Pre) 2001
399. The Committee on Financial Sector Reforms 2008, in
India was headed by :
(a) Bimal Jalan
(b) Raghuram Rajan
(c) C. Rangarajan
(d) M. Narasimham
Ans. (a)
Economic & Social Development
I.A.S. (Pre) 1995
Ans. (b)
General Studies
Uttarakhand P.C.S. (Pre) 2012
E-295
In 2007, Planning Commission constituted a Committee to
write a report proposing the next generation of financial
sector reforms in India. The Committee was headed by
Raghuram Rajan and it submitted its report in 2008.
400. With what subject is Raghuram Rajan Committee
connected?
(a) Austerity in Government Expenditure
(b) Financial Sector Reforms
(c) Export-Import Balance
(d) Rising in Prices
Ans. (b)
U.P.P.C.S. (Mains) 2007
The Government of India constituted a high level committee
on Financial Sector Reforms under the Chairmanship of
Raghuram Rajan in the year 2007.
401. The Bimal Jalan Panel was set up by Reserve Bank of
India to:
(a) Suggest to minimize the Non-Performing Assets
(b) Scrutinize application for new bank licenses
(c) Frame guidelines for financial inclusion
(d) Study use of mobiles in delivering banking services
Ans. (b)
U.P.P.C.S. (Pre) 2014
The Reserve Bank of India (RBI) had set up a three-member
Committee under the former Governor, Bimal Jalan to
scrutinize applications for new bank licenses. The Committee
submitted its report on 25 February, 2014.
402. Who was the first Chairman of the ‘Disinvestment
Commission' of India?
(a) G.V. Ramkrishna
(c) Arun Jaitley
Ans. (a)
(b) C. Rangarajan
(d) Montek Singh Ahluwalia
U.P.P.C.S. (Spl.) (Mains) 2004
Disinvestment in India is a policy of the Government of
India, wherein the government liquidates its assets in the
public sector enterprises partially or fully. Disinvestment
Commission in India was constituted under the Chairmanship
of G.V. Ramkrishna in 1996. It submitted 13 reports
covering recommendations on privatization of 57 public
sector units.
403. Rangarajan Committee on disinvestment of shares was
appointed by the Government of India in :
(a) 199] (b) 1993
Economic & Social Development
(c) 1999 (d) 2004
Jharkhand P.C.S. (Pre) 2013
Ans. (b)
Rangarajan Committee on disinvestment of Government's
shares in public sector companies was appointed in 1993 by
the Government of India.
404. Rangarajan Committee was constituted for?
(a) Disinvestment
(c) Tax reform
Ans. (a)
(b) Banking reform
(d) Foreign trade
M.P.P.C.S. (Pre) 2014
See the explanation of above question.
405. Who has been recently made the Chairman of the
working group on revision of Wholesale Price Index
Series?
(a) C. Rangarajan
(c) К.С. Рant
Ans. (d)
(b) P.R. Panchamukhi
(d) Abhijit Sen
U.P.P.C.S. (Spl.) (Mains) 2004
In 2007, the government has constituted a Committee
under the Chairmanship of Abhijit Sen to study and make
recommendations for computation of Wholesale Price Index
(WPI). The Committee submitted its report in May, 2008 and
recommended base year 2004-05 for WPI series.
406. With reference to ‘Financial Stability and Development
Council', consider the following statements:
1. It is an organ of NITI Aayog.
2. It is headed by Union Finance Minister.
3. It monitors macroprudential supervision of the
economy.
Which of the statements given above is/are correct?
(a) 1 and 2 only
(c) 2 and 3 only
Ans. (c)
(b) 3 only
(d) 1, 2 and 3
I.A.S. (Pre) 2016
With a view to strengthening and institutionalizing the
mechanism for maintaining financial stability, enhancing
inter-regulatory coordination and promoting financial sector
development, the Financial Stability and Development
Council (FSDC) was set up by the Government as the apex
level forum in December, 2010.The Chairman of the Council
is the Finance Minister and its members include the heads
of financial sector regulators (RBI, SEBI, PFRDA & IRDA
General Studies E-296
etc.), Finance Secretary, Department of Economic Affairs
and Chief Economic Advisor. It monitors macroprudential
supervision of the economy and also focuses on financial
literacy and financial inclusion.
407. Recently, a scheme named ‘Swabhimaan' was launched. It’s main aim is :
(a) To take banks to the doorsteps of the rural poor
(b) To provide skill to rural artisans
(c) To empower rural women
(d) To provide houses to BPL families
Ans. (a)
U.P.P.C.S. (Mains) 2010
Swabhimaan Campaign was launched on 10 February, 2011
for financial inclusion. It aimed at expanding banking and
financial services in rural areas. It promised to bring basic
banking services at the doorsteps of the rural poor. Under the
programme, small and marginal farmers and rural artisans
get easy access to credit at lower rates.
408. 'Swabhimaan Scheme’ launched in India is associated
with :
(a) Rural women rights
(b) Rural old people care
(c) Rural banking
(d) Rural food security
Ans. (c)
See the explanation of above question.
U.P.P.C.S. (Pre) 2012
409. What is/are the facility/facilities the beneficiaries can
get from the services of Business Correspondent (Bank
Saathi) in branchless areas?
1. It enables the beneficiaries to draw their subsidies
and social security benefits in their villages.
2. It enables the beneficiaries in the rural areas to make
deposits and withdrawals.
Select the correct answer using the code given below.
(a) 1 only
(c) Both 1 and 2
Ans. (c)
(b) 2 only
(d) Neither 1 nor 2
I.A.S. (Pre) 2014
Swabhimaan is a financial inclusion campaign launched on
10 February, 2011 by the Government of India. It promised
to bring basic banking services to all unbanked villages in
the country with population above 2000. The Swabhimaan
Campaign facilitate opening of bank accounts, provide need
based credit, remittance facilities and help to promote financial
Economic & Social Development
literacy in rural India using various models and technologies
including branchless banking models through Business
Correspondents. Under the scheme, subsidies and social
security benefits are directly transferred to beneficiaries
accounts.
410.What is/are the purpose/purposes of the Government's
‘Sovereign Gold Bond Scheme' and ‘Gold Monetization
Scheme' ?
1. To bring the idle gold lying with Indian households
into the economy
2. To promote FDI in the gold and Jewellery sector
3. To Reduce India's dependence on gold imports
Select the correct answer using the code given below :
(a) 1 only
(c) 1 and 3 only
Ans. (c)
(b) 2 and 3 only
(d) 1, 2 and 3
I.A.S. (Pre) 2016
'Gold Monetization Scheme' (GMS) and 'Sovereign Gold
Bond Scheme' (SGB) were launched in 2015. The objective
of GMS was to monetize the gold which is lying idle with
individuals and households or institutions like banks, and
the aim of SGB was to reduce the demand for physical gold
and shift a part of domestic savings used for purchase of
gold into financial savings. The main purpose of both the
scheme was to mobilize the gold held by households and
to put this gold into productive use and in the long run to
reduce the Current Account Deficit (CAD) by reducing the
country's reliance on imports of gold to meet the domestic
demand.
411. Which one of the following is covered by the Kisan
Credit Card Scheme?
(a) Consumption Credit and Investment Credit
(b) Only Consumption Credit
(c) Only Investment Credit
(d) None of the above
Ans. (a)
U.P. U.D.A./L.D.A. (Mains) 2010
The Kisan Credit Card (KCC) scheme was introduced in
August, 1998 for providing adequate and timely credit
support to farmers. The KCC scheme is implemented by
Commercial Banks, Regional Rural Banks (RRBs) and
Small Finance Banks and Cooperatives. The KCC covers postGeneral Studies E-297
harvest expenses, produce marketing loans, consumption
requirements of farmer household and investment credit
requirements for agriculture and allied activities. In March,
2012, the government amended the KCC Scheme and now a
KCCcard holder can get an ATM-enabled Rupay debit card.
412. Kisan Credit Card (KCC) Scheme for farmers was
introduced in :
(a) 1998-1999
(c) 2000-2001
Ans. (a)
(b) 1999-2000
(d) 2001-2002
U.P. P.C.S. (Mains) 2014
See the explanation of above question.
413. With reference to the institution of Banking Ombudsman
in India, which one of the following statements is not
correct?
(a) The Banking Ombudsman is appointed by the Reserve
Bank of India.
(b) The Banking Ombudsman can consider complaints
from Non-Resident Indians, having accounts in India.
(c) The orders passed by the Banking Ombudsman are
final and binding on the parties concerned.
(d) The service provided by the Banking Ombudsman is
free of any fee.
Ans. (c)
I.A.S. (Pre) 2010
The Banking Ombudsman is appointed by the Reserve
Bank of India to redress customer complaints against deficiency in certain banking services. The order passed by the
Banking Ombudsman is not final and binding on the parties
concerned. And, the Banking Ombudsman does not charge
any fee for filling and resolving customer's complaints.
Hence, option (c) is the correct answer.
414. Consider the following statements :
1. In India, credit rating agencies are regulated by
Reserve Bank of India.
2. The rating agency popularly known as ICRA is a
public limited company.
3. Brickwork Ratings is an Indian credit rating agency.
Which of the statements given above are correct?
(a) 1 and 2 only
(c) 1 and 3 only
Ans. (b)
(b) 2 and 3 only
(d) 1, 2 and 3
I.A.S. (Pre) 2022
A credit rating agency is an entity which assesses the ability
and willingness of the issuer company for timely payment of
interest and principal on a debt instrument. In India, credit rating agencies are regulated by SEBI. The SEBI (Credit Rating
Economic & Social Development
Agencies) Regulations, 1999 govern the credit rating agencies and provide for eligibility criteria for registration of
credit rating agencies, monitoring and review of ratings.
requirements for a proper rating process, avoidance of conflict
of interest and inspection of rating agencies by SEBI, amongst
other things. Hence, statement 1 is incorrect.
ICRA Limited (ICRA) is an Indian independent and professional investment information and credit rating agency.
It is a Public Limited Company, with its shares listed on the
Bombay Stock Exchange and the National Stock Exchange.
Hence, statement 2 is correct.
Brickwork Ratings (BWR) is a SEBI registered Indian credit
rating agency. It offers rating services on Bank Loans, NCD.
Commercial Paper, Fixed Deposits, Securitised Papers, Security Receipts, etc. Hence, statement 3 is correct.
415. Which is a credit rating agency in India ?
(a) CRISIL
(c) ICRA
Ans. (d)
(b) CARE
(d) All of the above
U.P.P.C.S. (Mains) 2008
CRISIL, CARE and ICRA are credit rating agencies in India
416. Consider the following Credit Rating Agencies and
arrange them in chronological order :
1. CARE
2. ICRA
3. CRISIL
Select the correct answer from the codes given below:
Codes :
(a) 3, 2, 1 (b) 3, 1,2
(c) 1, 2,3 (d) 1, 3,2
U.P. B.E.O. (Pre) 2019
Ans. (a)
Credit Rating Agency Set up Year
CARE 1993
1991
1987
ICRA
CRISIL
Hence, option (a) gives the correct chronological order of
these Credit Rating Agencies.
417. CRISIL :
(a) promotes exports
(b) provides finance to rural areas
(c) provides financial assistance to industries
(d) evaluates the credit worthiness of a company
Ans. (d)
General Studies
U.P.P.C.S. (Spl.) (Mains) 2008
E-298
Set up in 1987, Credit Rating Information Services of India
Ltd. (CRISIL) is one of the oldest credit rating agencies
in India. It evaluates the credit worthiness of commercial
entities on the basis of their strength, market reputation,
market share and board.
418. The Phillips Curve represents relationship between :
(a) Deflation and Unemployemt
(b) Inflation and Unemployment
(c) Inflation and Disguised Unemployment
(d) Deflation and Cyclical Unemployment
Ans. (b)
Uttarakhand P.C.S. (Pre) 2012
The Phillips Curve is an economic concept developed
by A.W. Phillips in 1958, which states that inflation and
unemployment have a stable and inverse relationship.
The theory claims that with economic growth comes
inflation, which in turn should lead to more jobs and less
unemployment. It is used in short-run trade off between
unemployment and inflation.
419. 'Smart Money' is a term used for :
(a) Internet Banking
(b) Credit Card
(c) Savings Account in the Bank
(d) Current Account in the Bank
Ans. (b)
U.P. Lower Sub. (Pre) 2008
'Smart Money' is a term used for credit card.
420. What is called 'Plastic Money'?
(a) Paper currency (b) Credit card
(c) Discount coupon (d) Share
Ans. (b)
Uttarakhand U.D.A./L.D.A. (Pre) 2007
'Plastic money' refers to hard plastic card we use every day
in place of actual bank notes. They can be in many different
forms such as credit cards, debit cards, prepaid cash card,
smart cards and store cards etc.
421. The term ‘plastic money' applies to :
(a) Bank draft made of plastic coated paper
(b) Currency notes printed on plastic coated paper
(c) Currency notes impregnated with plastic thread
(d) Credit cards mainly issued by the banks
See the explanation of above question.
422. The expanded form of UPI is:
(a) Uninterrupted Payment Initiation
(b) Uniform Payment Inception
(c) Unified Payment Interface
(d) United Payment Initiation
Ans. (c)
70th B.P.S.C. (Pre) (Re-Exam) 2024
Unified Payments Interface (UPI) is an Indian instant
payment system and protocol developed and introduced by
the National Payments Corporation of India (NPCI) in 2016.
The interface facilitates inter-bank peer-to-peer (P2P) and
person-to-merchant (P2M) transactions. UPI is a system that
powers multiple bank accounts into a single mobile
application (of any participating bank), merging several
banking features, seamless fund routing and merchant
payments into one hood.
423. PIN in banking transaction is known as :
(a) Postal Index Number
(b) Permanent Identification Number
(c) Personal Identification Number
(d) None of the above
Ans. (c)
U.P. R.O./A.R.O. (Pre) 2023
In banking transactions, personal identification number
(PIN) is a numerical code issued with a payment card that
is required to be entered to complete various financial
transactions. The core purpose of a personal identification
number (PIN) is to provide an additional layer of security to
the electronic transaction process.
424. Which one of the following is not a prepaid payment
instrument?
(a) Delhi Metro Rail Card
(b) Electronic Wallet
(c) Credit Card of a Nationalized Bank
(d) Airtel Money
Ans. (c)
U.P. P.C.S. (Mains) 2014
Credit card of a nationalized bank is not a prepaid payment
instrument, and rest of the options are prepaid payment
instruments.
425. For the existence of a market which is indispensable?
(a) Banks
(c) Prices
(b) Economic Laws
(d) Trade Unions
M.P.P.C.S. (Pre) 1997 U.P.P.C.S. (Mains) 2006
Ans. (d) Ans. (c)
Economic & Social Development General Studies E-299
Market is the place, where commodities and services are
purchased and sold. The buying and selling of commodities
and services are occured on the basis of production cost,
which is called commodities or services price. So, for the
existence of a market, prices are indispensable.
426. Market is an economic tendency, which leads to which
of the following trends?
(a) Individualism
(c) Holism
Ans. (b)
(b) Consumerism
(d) Capitalism
U.P. Lower Sub. (Pre) 2013
Market is an economic tendency,which leads to consumerism.
427. The buyer's market is known where :
(a) supply is more than the demand
(b) demand is more than the supply
(c) demand is equal to the supply
(d) None of the above
Ans. (a)
U.P.P.C.S. (Mains) 2010
A buyer's market refers to a situation where supply exceeds
demand, and purchasers have an advantage over sellers in
price negotiations.
428. Given below are two statements. One is labelled as
Assertion (A) and the other as Reason (R) :
Assertion (A): Accounting is the language of business.
Reason (R) : Accounting provides all information
needed by a businessman.
Select the correct answer using the code given below:
Code:
(a) Both (A) and (R) are true and (R) is the correct
explanation of (A).
(b) (A) is false but (R) is true.
(c) (A) is true but (R) is false.
(d) Both (A) and (R) are true but (R) is not the correct
explanation of (A).
Ans. (a)
U.P. R.O./A.R.O. (Pre) 2023
Accounting is often referred to as the ‘language of business
because it serves to communicate financial information
about a company or organization. This vital function enables
stakeholders, such as investors, creditors, and management, to
understand a company's financial performance and position.
Accounting plays a vital role in running a business as it
provides all information needed by a businessman. It helps
to track income and expenditure, ensure statutory compliance
and provide investors, management, and government with
quantitative financial information which can be ued in making
business decions. Hence, both (A) and (Rare true and (R) 15
the correct planation of (A).
429. Given below are two statements, in which one is
labelled as Assertion (A) and the other as Reason (R):
Assertion (A) : A condition is a stipulation which is
essential to the main purpo of the contract.
Reason (R) : A breach of ndition gives a right to claim
damages and not a right to repudiate the contract.
Select the correct answer using the code given
below:
Code:
(a) (A) is false but (R) is true.
(b) Both (A) and (R) are true and (R) is correct explanation
of (A).
(c) Both (A) and (R) are true but (R) is not the correct
explanation of (A).
(d) (A) is true but (R) is false.
Ans. (d)
U.P. R.O./A.R.O. (Pre) 2023
A stipulation in a contract of sale with reference to goods
which are the subject thereof may be a condition or a
warranty. A condition is a stipulation essential to the main
purpose of the contract, the breach of which gives rise to
a right to treat the contract as repudiated. A warranty is a
stipulation collateral to the main purpose ofthe contract, the
breach of which gives rise to a claim for damages but not to a
right to reject the goods and treat the contract as repudiated.
Hence, (A) is true but (R) is false.
430. With reference to physical capital in Indian economy.
consider the following pairs:
Items
1. Farmer's plough
2. Computer
3. Yarn used by the weaver
4. Petrol
Category
Working capital
Fixed Capital
Fixed Capital
Working capital
How many of the above pairs are correctly matched (a) Only one
(c) Only three
(b) Only two
(d) All four
I.A.S. (Pre) 2024
Ans. (b)
Economic & Social Development General Studies E300
Fixed capital refers to long-term tangible assets used in
the production of goods and services. Tools, machines.
buildings etc. can be used in production over many years,
and are called fixed capital. These tools and machines
range from very simple tools such as a farmer's plough
to sophisticated machines such as generators, turbines,
computers, etc. Hence, pair 1 is incorrect while pair 2 is
correctly matched.
Production of goods and services requires a variety of raw
materials such as the yarn used by the weaver, the clay
used by the potter and fuels like petrol and diesel used in
machines and transportation. Also, some money is always
required during production to make payments and buy
other necessary items. Raw materials and money in hand
are called working capital. Hence, pair 3 is incorrect while
pair 4 is correctly matched.
431. Match List-I with List-II and choose the correct answer
using the code given below :
List-I
A. Merchandise Turnover
B. Current Ratio
List-II
Current Assets
1. Current Liabilities
,Liquid Assets
Current Liabilities
Interest & Tax
Total Assets
Return on Total Assets/
Capital Employed
Net Profit before
Interest & Tax
Total Assets
Note: In the question, 'Gross Capital Employed is used
instead of Return on Total Assets/Capital Employed', which
is incorrect.
432. Auctions or dynamic pricing markets are examples of:
(a) B2B commerce
(c) C2C commerce
Ans. (a) & (c)
(b) C2B commerce
(d) None of the above
M.P. P.C.S. (Pre) 2021
Dynamic pricing, also referred to as real-time pricing, is a
highly flexible way of setting the cost for a product or service.
Dynamic pricing is a common practice in several industries
such as hospitality, tourism, entertainment, retail, electricity,
and public transport. In recent years, expansion of electronic
markets (abbreviated as e-markets) triggered an increase in
the role and importance of efficient pricing mechanism. Current
e-markets which are based on auctions or dynamic pricing
strategy can be classified as B2C (Business to Customer), C2C
(Customer to Customer), B2G (Business to Government), and
B2B (Business to Business) markets.
433. Consumers fix price on their own, which business
accept or decline comes under model.
Net Profit before
C. Acid Test Ratio 3.
(a) B2B
D. Gross Capital Employed 4. Cost of Goods solР
Average stock
(c) C2B
Code:
Ans. (c)
A B C D
(a) 3
2 1 4
(b) 4 2 3
(c) 4 3 2
(d) 2 1 3 4
U.P. R.O./A.R.O. (Pre) 2023
Ans. (*)
The correctly matched lists are as follows:
(b) B2C
(d) C2C
M.P. P.C.S. (Pre) 2021
Consumers fix price on their own, which business accept or
decline, comes under C2B model. In contrast to the more
traditional business-to-consumer (B2C) model, the consumer-to-business (C2B) model allows businesses to extract
value from consumers, and vice-versa. In the C2B model,
businesses profit from consumers' willingness to name their
own price or contribute data or marketing to the company,
while consumers profit from flexibility, direct payment, or
free or reduced-price products and services.
434. Which type of market is suitable for vegetable crops?
(a) Short term
(b) Very short term
List-I List-II
Merchandise Turnover Cost of Goods sold
Average stock
Current Assets Current Ratio (c) Long term Current Liabilities (d) Very long term
Liquid Assets U.P. Lower Sub. (Pre) 2013 Acid Test Ratio Current Liabilities Ans. (b)
Economic & Social Development General Studies E-301
Classification of markets on the basis of time
Very Short Period Market : This is when the
supply of goods is fixed, and so it cannot be changed
instantaneously. Say for example the market for flowers,
vegetables, fruits, etc. The prices of goods will depend
on demand
Short Period Market : The market is slightly longer
than the previous one. Here the supply can be slightly
adjusted
Long Period Market : Here the supply can be changed
easily by scaling production. So it can change according
to the demand of the market. So the market will determine
its equilibrium price in time.
Very Long Period Market : It is a permanent type
of market because goods are produced and supplied
according to the changing environment.
435. The supply-side economics lays greater emphasis on
the point of view of:
(a) producer
(c) consumer
Ans. (a)
(b) global economy
(d) middle-man
I.A.S. (Pre) 1998
The supply-side economics lays greater emphasis on the point
of view of producer. The core point of supply-side economics
is that production (i.e. the 'supply' of goods and services)
is the most important in determining economic growth. It
postulates tax cuts for the wealthy result in increased savings
and investment capacity for them that trickle down to the
overall economy.
436. When the total product remains constant, the marginal
product will be :
(a) Zero
(c) Positive
Ans. (a)
(b) Negative
(d) Constant
U.P. Lower Sub. (Pre) 2013
When the total product remains constant, the marginal
product will be zero. In this situation total product will reach
at optimum level.
437. A consumer is said to be in equilibrium, if :
(a) he is able to fulfil his need with a given level of income.
(b) he is able to live in full comforts with a given level of
income.
(c) he can fulfil his needs without consumption of certain
items.
(d) he is able to locate new sources of income.
L.A.S. (Pre) 1998
A consumer is said to be in equilibrium if he is able to
fulfil his need with a given level of income. In other words.
when a consumer feels that he cannot change his condition
either by carning more or by spending more or by changing
the quantities of things he buys, then he is said to be in
equilibrium. Equilibrium in the margınal utility, from an
economic point of view, is derived from money paid and well
consumed. As per the law of equi-marginal utility a consumer
will be in equilibrium when the ratio of marginal utility of a
commodity to its prices equals the ratio of marginal utility
of other commodity to its price.
438. Consider the following statements :
Other things remaining unchanged, market demand
for a good might increase if:
1. price of its substitute increases
2. price of its complement increases
3. the good is an inferior good and income of the
consumers increases
4. its price falls
Which of the above statements are correct?
(a) 1 and 4 only
(c) 1, 3 and 4
Ans. (a)
(b) 2, 3 and 4
(d) 1, 2 and 3
I.A.S. (Pre) 2021
Substitute goods are those goods which can be used with
equal ease in place of one another. Demand for a commodity
will bear a direct relationship to the price of its substitute
commodity. So, demand for a good might increase if the
price of its substitute increases. Hence, statement 1 is correct.
Complementary goods are those goods whose utility depends
upon the availability of both the goods together. The demand
for a commodity bears an inverse relationship with the price
of its complementary goods. The demand for a commodity
will decrease if the price of its complementary commodity
increases. Hence, statement 2 is incorrect.
In the case of inferior goods, an increase in the size of the
income leads to a fall in the quantity demanded of these
commodities. Hence, statement 3 is incorrect.
Market demand for goods might increase if their price falls
because as per 'Law of Demand’ there is an inverse relationship between the price of a commodity and its quantity
demanded. Hence, statement 4 is correct.
439. With fixed demand and increase in supply, the price
of the commodity is likely to:
(a) remain constant
(b) increase E-302
(c) decrease
(d) no definite pattern can be predicted
Ans. (c)
U.P. P.C.S. (Mains) 2016
Price of the commodity is proportional to demand of the
commodity, while supply of the commodity and price of the
commodity have inverse relation. Hence, in the context of
general market and general goods, if supply of the commodity
increases at fixed demand, then price will have decreasing
potential.
440. A rise in general level of prices may be caused by:
1. an increase in the money supply.
2. a decrease in the aggregate level of output.
3. an increase in the effective demand.
Select the correct answer using the codes given
below:
(a) 1 only
(c) 2 and 3 only
Ans. (d)
(b) 1 and 2 only
(d) 1, 2 and 3
I.A.S. (Pre) 2013
Rise or fall in prices is caused due to changes in supply and
demand. An increase in the money supply increases the demand and thus increases prices. A decrease in the aggregate
level of output will reduce supply and thus prices increase
again. An increase in effective demand would again raise up
the prices. Thus, all three events will raise the prices.
441. Supply of money remaining the same when there is an
increase in demand for money, there will be :
(a) a fall in the level of prices
(b) an increase in the rate of interest
(c) a decrease in the rate of interest
(d) an increase in the level of income and employment
Ans. (b)
I.A.S. (Pre) 2013
If the supply of money is constant and its demand is increasing there will be an increase in interest rates. It does not have
much to do with the level of prices and the increase in the
level of income and employment.
442. Given below are two statements, one is labelled as
Assertion (A) and the other as Reason (R).
Assertion (A): Consumers can bargain below
Maximum Retail Price (MRP).
Reason (R) MRP is a price a seller must charge from
the buyer.
Select the correct answer from the code given below:
Code:
(a) Both (A) and (R) are true, but (R) is not the correct
explanation of (A).
(b) (A) is false, but (R) is true.
(c) (A) is true, but (R) is false.
(d) Both (A) and (R) are true and (R) is the correct
explanation of (A).
Ans. (c)
U.P. P.C.S. (Pre) 2025
The legal definition of MRP (Maximum Retail Price) clearly
states that it is the maximum price at which a packaged
commodity can be sold to the consumer. It is inclusive of
all taxes. Hence, MRP is a ceiling (upper limit), not a fixed
price that must compulsorily be charged.
443. Assertion (A) : All businessmen make profit due to
price-hike.
Reason (R) : The customer has to curtail his needs due
to price-hike.
In the context of the above statements, which of the
following is correct :
(a) Both A and R are true and R is the correct explanation
ofA.
(b) Both A and R are true, but R is not the correct
explanation of A.
(c) A is true, but R is false.
(d) A is false, but R is true.
Ans. (b)
U.P.U.D.A./L.D.A. (Pre) 2002
U.P.P.C.S. (Pre) 2003
Due to price-hike all businessmen make profit and consumers
feel disadvantage. Again, due to price-hike, the purchasing
power of money is decreased and consumers have to pay
more amount of money to purchase same amount of goods
and services, that he used to purchase earlier. Hence, both
Assertion and Reason are true but Reason is not the correct
explanation of Assertion.
444. Improvement of profit volume ratio can be done by
the following :
(a) Increasing selling price
(b) Altering sales mixture
(c) Reducing Variable cost
(d) All of the above
Ans. (d)
Economic & Social Development General Studies
U.P. R.O./A.R.O. (Mains) 2017
E-303
When the contribution from sales is expressed as a sales
value percentage, then it is known as profit volume ratio
(P/V ratio). An improvement in this ratio can be achieved
by the selling price increase, by altering sales mixture
(concentrating on those products by which highest
contribution can be achieved) and by reduction in the variable
cost per unit
445. For pricing of public goods, the concept of 'Shadow
Prices' was given by:
(a) J. Tinbergen
(b) A.K. Sen
(c) P.C. Mahalanobis
(d) R. Nurkse
Ans. (a)
U.P. U.D.A./L.D.A. (Spl.) (Pre) 2010
For pricing of public goods, the concept of 'Shadow Prices
was given by J. Tinbergen. According to J. Tinbergen, "Shadow prices are prices indicating the intrinsic or true value of a factor or product in the sense of equilibrium prices."
A shadow price is an estimated price for something that is not normally priced in the market or sold in the market. These prices reflect true values for factors and products for the calculation or estimation of prices in social cost-benefit analysis.
446. Which of the following is NOT a Public good? (a) Government Administration
(b) National Defence
(c) Cars
(d) Roads
Ans. (c)
R.A.S./R.T.S. (Pre) 2023
Among the given options, cars are not included in public goods, while government administration, national defence and roads are public goods.
447. If a commodity
Government,
 is provided free to the public by the then
(a) The opportunity cost is zero. (b) The opportunity cost is ignored. (c) The opportunity cost is transferred from the consumers of the product to the tax-paying public. (d) The opportunity cost is transferred from the consumers of the product to the Government.
Ans. (c)
conomic & Social Development
L.A.S. (Pre) 2018
Opportunity cost represents the benefits an individual.
investor or business misses out on when choosing one
alternative over another. If a commodity is provided free to the public by the Government (for example-street light, free education), this would always come at a cost of someone
(L.c. tax-paycrs) paying for it. Therefore, in the case of free public utilities, the opportunity cost is transferred from the consumers of the commodity to the tax-paying public.
448. With reference to trade, which of the following state- ments is/are correct?
1. It represents demand and supply both.
2. It deals with only the demand side.
Select the correct answer using the code given below Code :
(a) Only 1
(c) Both 1 and 2
Ans. (a)
(b) Only 2
(d) Neither 1 nor 2
U.P. R.O./A.R.O. (Mains) 2021
Trade means buying and selling or the exchange of goods and services between two or more parties in consideration
of money or money's worth. It involves the transfer of goods and services from one person or entity to another. Trade rep- resents both the side of demand and supply where both the parties know what is demanded and what is to be supplied.
449. With reference to Commerce, which of the following statements is/are correct?
1. It is the field of business that assists in the removal of all impediments to the facilitation of exchange. 2. It deals with the factors of delivering the products to the consumers.
Select the correct answer using the code given below: Code:
(a) Only
(c) Both 1 and 2
Ans. (c)
(b) Only 2
(d) Neither 1 nor 2
U.P. R.O./A.R.O. (Mains) 2021
Commerce is the exchange of goods and services between businesses. Commerce is the trade of goods, services, of other things of value between companies It is
 or organizations the subset of business that assists in the removal of all impediments to the facilitation of exchange. Commerce does not relate to the sourcing, manufacturing, orproduction
processes but only to the distribution of goods and services.
consumers.
It deals with the factors of delivering the products to the
General Studies E-304
1
